CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS COMMISSION 


PLUMBING CODE 


READ ME 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


IMPORTANT NOTICE 


Your purchase of this code includes 
a free subscription for all State 
issued supplements and errata. 
You must register online at 
www.iapmomembership.org/reg 

to keep your code up-to-date! 


2025 CALIFORNIA 
PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS 
TITLE 24, PART 5 


Based on the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code? 


California Building Standards Commission 


Effective January 1, 2026 


For Errata and Supplement effective 
dates see the History Note Appendix 


Copyright? to 2024 UPC? Held by 


International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials 
4755 E. Philadelphia Street 
Ontario, CA 91761-2816 – USA 


First Printing, July 2025 
Printed in The United States 


PREFACE 


This document is Part 5 of thirteen parts of the official triennial compilation and publication of the adoptions, amendments 
and repeal of administrative regulations to California Code of Regulations, Title 24, also referred to as the California 
Building Standards Code. This part is known as the California Plumbing Code. 


The California Building Standards Code is published in its entirety every three years by order of the California legislature, 
with supplements published in intervening years. The California legislature delegated authority to various state agencies, 
boards, commissions and departments to create building regulations to implement the State's statutes. These building 
regulations, or standards, have the same force of law, and take effect 180 days after their publication unless otherwise 
stipulated. The California Building Standards Code applies to occupancies in the State of California as annotated. 


A city, county, or city and county may establish more restrictive building standards reasonably necessary because of local 
climatic, geological or topographical conditions. Findings of the local condition(s) and the adopted local building standard(s) 
must generally be filed with the California Building Standards Commission (or other filing if indicated) to become effective, 
and may not be effective sooner than the effective date of this edition of California Building Standards Code. Local building 
standards that were adopted and applicable to previous editions of the California Building Standards Code do not apply to 
this edition without appropriate adoption and the required filing. 


Should you find publication (e.g., typographical) errors or inconsistencies in this code or wish to offer comments toward 
improving its format, please address your comments to: 


California Building Standards Commission 
2525 Natomas Park Drive, Suite 130 
Sacramento, CA 95833-2936 
Phone: (916) 263-0916 
Web Page: www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc 
Email: cbsc@dgs.ca.gov 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The 2025 California Building Standards Code (Code) was developed through the outstanding collaborative efforts of the 
Department of Housing and Community Development, Division of the State Architect, Office of the State Fire Marshal, 
Department of Health Care Access and Information, California Energy Commission, California Department of Public Health, 
California State Lands Commission, Board of State and Community Corrections, Department of Water Resources, State 
Historical Building Safety Board, Department of Consumer Affairs, State Librarian, Department of Food and Agriculture, 
and the California Building Standards Commission (Commission). 


This collaborative effort included the assistance of the Commission's Code Advisory Committees and many other volunteers 
who worked tirelessly to assist the Commission in the production of this Code. 


Governor Gavin Newsom 
Members of the Building Standards Commission 


Secretary Amy Tong — Chair 
Rajesh Patel — Vice-Chair 


Erick Mikiten Kent Sasaki 
Elley Klausbruckner Peter Santillan 
Aaron Stockwell Laura Rambin 
Juvilyn Alegre James Haskin 
Frank Ramirez 


Stoyan Bumbalov — Executive Director 
Kevin Day — Deputy Executive Director 


For questions on California state agency amendments, please refer to the contact list on page iv. 


California Code of Regulations Title 24 
California State Agency Contact List 
The following state agencies may propose building standards for buildings, structures and applications under their authority for publication 
in Title 24. Notice of such proposals may be requested from each agency. See Sections 1.2 through 1.14 of the California Building Code 
(Part 2, T24) for detailed information on the regulatory authority of most state agencies summarized below. Note [agency acronyms] 


shown in banners/Matrix Adoption Tables in T24. 


Board of State & Community Corrections [BSCC] 
bscc.ca.gov BSCC-Mail@bscc.ca.gov 


(916) 445-5073 Local Detention Facilities 


Building Standards Commission [BSC, BSC-CG] 
dgs.ca.gov/bsc 
(916) 263-0916 


cbsc@dgs.ca.gov 
State Buildings including UC & CSU, 
Nonresidential Green Buildings Standards 


Department of Consumer Affairs Boards/Bureaus: 


Acupuncture Board [CA] 


acupuncture.ca.gov AcuPolicy@dca.ca.gov 
(916) 515-5200 Acupuncture Offices 
Board of Pharmacy [CA] 

pharmacy.ca.gov 

(916) 518-3100 Pharmacies 


Board of Barbering & Cosmetology [CA] 


barbercosmo.ca.gov barbercosmo@dca.ca.gov 
(916) 574-7570 Barber, Cosmetology & 


Electrolysis Establishments 


Bureau of Household Goods & Services [CA] 
bhgs.dca.ca.gov 
(916) 999-2041 Insulation Testing 
Structural Pest Control Board [CA] 
pestboard.ca.gov 
(800) 737-8188 


pestboard@dca.ca.gov 
Structural Pest Control Locations 


Veterinary Medical Board [CA] 
vmb.ca.gov 


(916) 515-5220 


vmb@dca.ca.gov 
Veterinary Facilities 


Department of Food & Agriculture [AGR] 
cdfa.ca.gov 


(916) 900-5004 
(916) 900-5064 
(916) 900-5008 


Rendering & Collection Centers 
Meat & Poultry Packing Plants 
Milk & Dairy Food Safety 


Department of Health Care Access and Information 


Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development 
[OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] 


hcai.ca.gov 
(916) 440-8300 


regsunit@hcai.ca.gov 
Hospital Standards, Skilled Nursing 
Facility Standards & Clinic Standards 


Department of Public Health [DPH] 
cdph.ca.gov (Recreational Health) 


(916) 449-5661 Food Establishments, Organized 
Camps, Public Swimming Pools 


Department of Housing and Community Development 
[HCD 1, 2, 1-AC] 


hed.ca.gov 
(800) 952-8356 
Option 5 > Option 2 


Title24@hcd.ca.gov 


State Housing Law: including 

Housing Accessibility, Hotels/Motels, 

Apartments/Condominiums, Dormitories, 

Single-Family Dwellings, ADUs, Permanent 

Structures in Mobile Home Parks 

Option 5 > Option 4 Factory-Built Housing 

Option 5 > Option 5 Employee Housing 
Department of Water Resources [DWR] 

water.ca.gov 


(916) 653-5791 


DWRwebcomment@water.ca.gov 
Plumbing for Recycled Water, 
Floodplain Construction 


Division of the State Architect 
dgs.ca.gov/dsa 
(916) 445-8100 
Access Compliance [DSA-AC] 
(916) 445-5827 DSAaccess@dgs.ca.gov 
Access for Persons with Disabilities 
Structural Safety [DSA-SS, DSA-SS/CC] 
Public Schools & Community Colleges, 
State Essential Services Buildings 
State Historical Building Safety Board [SHBSB] 
(916) 445-7627 shbsb@dgs.ca.gov 
Historical Building Rehabilitation, 


Preservation, Restoration or Relocation 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


California Code of Regulations Title 24 
California State Agency Contact List (continued) 


Energy Commission [CEC] 

energy.ca.gov Title24@energy.ca.gov 

(800) 772-3300 Building Energy Efficiency, 
Compliance Manual & Compliance Forms 


Office of the State Fire Marshal [SFM] 
osfm.fire.ca.gov codedevelopment@fire.ca.gov 
(916) 568-3800 Fire & Life Safety 


State Lands Commission [SLC] 
slc.ca.gov MOTEMS ..Public@slc.ca.gov 
(510) 741-4950 Marine Oil Terminals 


State Librarian [SL] 
library.ca.gov csllaw(a)library.ca.gov 
(916) 323-9843 Public Library 


Construction & Renovation 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


How to Distinguish 800880 Model Code Language 
an 
California Amendments 


To distinguish between model code language and the incorporated California amendments, including exclusive California 
standards, California amendments will appear in italic font print. 


[BSC] This is an example of a state agency acronym used to identify an adoption or amendment by the agency. The acronyms 
will appear at California Amendments and in the Matrix Adoption Tables. Sections 1.2.0 through 1.14.0 in Chapter 1, Division 1 
of this code, explain the used acronyms, the application of state agency adoptions to building occupancies or building features, 
the enforcement agency as designated by state law (may be the state adopting agency or local building or fire official), the 
authority in state law for the state agency to make the adoption, and the specific state law being implemented by the agency 's 
adoption. The following acronyms are used in Title 24 to identify the state adopting agency making an adoption. 


Legend of Acronyms of Adopting State Agencies 


BSC California Building Standards Commission (see Section 1.2.0) 

BSC-CG California Building Standards Commission-CALGreen (see Section 1.2.3) 
BSCC Board of State and Community Corrections (see Section 1.3.0) 

SFM Office of the State Fire Marshal (see Section 1.11.0) 


HCD-1 Department of Housing and Community Development (see Section 1.8.2.1.1) 
HCD-2 Department of Housing and Community Development (see Section 1.8.2.1.3) 
HCD-1I/AC Department of Housing and Community Development (see Section 1.8.2.1.2) 
DSA-AC Division of the State Architect-Access Compliance (see Section 1.9.1) 
DSA-SS Division of the State Architect-Structural Safety (see Section 1.9.2) 


DSA-SS/CC Division of the State Architect-Structural Safety/Community Colleges 
(see Section 1.9.2.2) 


OSHPD І Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.1) 
OSHPD IR Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.1) 
OSHPD 2 Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.2) 
OSHPD 3 Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.3) 
OSHPD 4 Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.4) 
OSHPD 5 Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.5) 
OSHPD 6 Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development (see Section 1.10.6) 


DPH Department of Public Health (see Section 1.7.0) 
AGR Department of Food and Agriculture (see Section 1.6.0) 
CEC California Energy Commission 

(see Section 100 in Part 6, the California Energy Code) 
CA Department of Consumer Affairs (see Section 1.6.0): 


Board of Barbering and Cosmetology 
Board of Examiners in Veterinary Medicine 
Board of Pharmacy 

Acupuncture Board 

Bureau of Household Goods and Services 


SPCB Structural Pest Control Board 

SL State Library (see Section 1.12.0) 

SLC State Lands Commission (see Section 1.14.0) 

DWR Department of Water Resources (see Section 1.13.0 of Chapter 1 of the California 


Plumbing Code in Part 5 of Title 24) 


The state agencies are available to answer questions about their adoptions. Contact information is provided on page iv of this code. 


To learn more about the use of this code refer to the following pages. Training materials on the application and use of this code 
are available at the website of the California Building Standards Commission www.dgs.ca.gov/bsc. 


vi 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA MATRIX ADOPTION TABLES 


Format of the Matrix Adoption Tables 


The matrix adoption tables, examples of which follow, are non-regulatory aids intended to show the user which state 
agencies have adopted and/or amended given sections of model code. An agency's statutory authority for certain 
occupancies or building applications determines which chapter or section may be adopted, repealed, amended or added. See 
Chapter 1, Division I, Sections 1.2.0 through 1.14.0, for agency authority, building application and enforcement 
responsibilities. 


The side headings identify the scope of the state agencies’ adoption as follows: 


Adopt the entire UPC chapter without state amendments. 


If there is an “X” under a particular state agency's acronym in this row, it means that particular state agency has adopted the 
entire model code chapter without any state amendments. 


Example: 
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building application.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | сс |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR DWR|CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 18213 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 5 ს M РШЕ 


sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
202 


Adopt the entire UPC chapter as amended, state-amended sections are listed below: 


If there is an “Х” under a particular state agency's acronym in this row, it means that a particular state agency has adopted 
the entire model code chapter, with state amendments. 


Each section that a state agency has amended and/or added within a particular chapter is listed. There will be an “X” under 
an agency's acronym in the row of the amended and/or added section. 


Example: 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building application.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC се; SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR DWR|CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC АС | SS SS/CC 1 18213 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X X 5 ს) M РШЕ 


sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
202 x x 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE vii 


Adopt only those sections which are listed below: 


If there is an “X” under a particular state agency's acronym in this row, it means that particular state agency is adopting only 
specific model code or state-amended sections within this chapter. There will be an *X" in the column under the agency's 
acronym, as well as an “X” by each section that the agency has adopted. 


Example: 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 1 - GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building application.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 


Adopting Agency BSC се; SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR DWR|CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 

Adopt Entire Chapter 

Adopt Entire Chapter as 

amended (amended SJA| M РЕ 


sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 


that are listed below ы 
Chapter/Section 

101 X 
202 X 


viii 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


[BSC] 


HOW TO DISTINGUISH MODEL CODE LANGUAGE 
FROM CALIFORNIA AMENDMENTS 


To distinguish between model code language and incorporated California Amendments, 
including exclusive California standards, California amendments will appear in italics font 
print. 


Symbols in the margins indicate the status of code changes as follows: 


This symbol identifies which State agency(s) by its *acronym" that has amended a section 
of the model code. For a complete listing of State agency acronyms, see the Application 
Section within Chapter 1, Division I. 


This symbol indicates that a change has been made to a California amendment. 


This symbol indicates that a section, paragraph, or table has been revised or relocated 
within IAPMO model code language. 


This symbol indicates deletion of California language. 


This symbol indicates where an entire section, paragraph, or table has been deleted from 
IAPMO model code language. 


Revision Markings 
A double right angle («) in the margin indicates that the text or a table has been relocated 
within the code. 


TIA ТТА indicates that the revision is the result of a Tentative Interim Amendment. 
TIA х 7 EM А 
tia For further information on tentative interim amendments see Section 5 of the ІАРМО 


TIA Regulations Governing Committee Projects available at http://codes.iapmo.org/ 


A reference in brackets [ ] following a section or paragraph indicates material that has been 
extracted from another document. This reprinted material is not the complete and official 
position of the source document on the referenced subject that 1s represented by the standard 
in its entirety. Material contained in this document that is taken or extracted from NFPA 
standards is used with permission of the National Fire Protection Association. This material 
is not the complete and official position of the NFPA on the reference subject, which is 
represented solely by the relevant standard in its entirety. NFPA standards can be accessed 
at www.nfpa.org. In addition, this extracted material may include revisions or modifications 
developed through IAPMO’s standards development process. Therefore, NFPA disclaims 
responsibility for the content of this Code. 


Text that is extracted pursuant to IAPMO's Extract Guidelines, but outside of the regular 
revision process is denoted with the use of the source document in the margin. This text is 
not fully processed by IAPMO in accordance with ANSI’s public announcement consensus 
requirements for an American National Standard (ANS) nor approved by ANSI’s Board 
of Standards Review. The next revision cycle processes such text in accordance with those 
requirements. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Important Notices and Disclaimers 

The 2024 edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code is developed through a consensus 
standards development process approved by the American National Standards Institute. 
This process brings together volunteers representing varied viewpoints and interests to 
achieve consensus on plumbing issues. While the International Association of Plumbing 
and Mechanical Officials ([APMO) administers the process and establishes rules to promote 
fairness in the development of consensus, it does not independently test, evaluate, or verify 
the accuracy of any information or the soundness of any judgments contained in its codes 
and standards. 


IAPMO disclaims liability for any personal injury, property, or other damages of any nature 
whatsoever, whether special, indirect, consequential, or compensatory, directly or indirectly 
resulting from the publication, use of, or reliance on this document. IAPMO also makes no 
guarantee or warranty as to the accuracy or completeness of any information published 
herein. 


In issuing and making this document available, IAPMO is not undertaking to render 
professional or other services for or on behalf of any person or entity. Nor is IAPMO 
undertaking to perform any duty owed by any person or entity to someone else. Anyone 
using this document should rely on his or her own independent judgment or, as appropriate, 
seek the advice of a competent professional in determining the exercise of reasonable care 
in any given circumstances. 


Updating IAPMO Codes 

Users of IAPMO codes should be aware that IAPMO codes may be amended from time to 
time through the issuance of Tentative Interim Amendments or corrected by Errata. IAPMO 
codes consist of the current edition of the document together with any Tentative Interim 
Amendment and any Errata in effect. 


To access information for a specific code or to determine whether an IAPMO code has been 
amended through the issuance of Tentative Interim Amendments or corrected by Errata, please 
visit the IAPMO codes information page on the IAPMO’s website (https://www.iapmo.org/code- 
development). The codes information page provides a list of IAPMO codes with up-to-date, 
specific information including any issued Tentative Interim Amendments and Errata. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FOREWORD 


Origin and Development 

The advantages of a statewide adopted Uniform Plumbing Code are recognized 
throughout the industry. Disorder in the industry because of widely divergent plumbing 
practices and the use of many different, often conflicting, plumbing codes by local 
jurisdictions influenced the Western Plumbing Officials Association (now the International 
Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials [[APMO]) to form a committee. This 
committee of plumbing inspectors, master and journeyman plumbers, and plumbing 
engineers, backed by public utility companies and the plumbing industry to create a basic 
plumbing document for general use. The product of this effort, the first edition of the 
Uniform Plumbing Code® (UPC®) was adopted by IAPMO in 1945. The widespread use 
of this code over the past seven decades by jurisdictions throughout the United States 
and internationally is testament to its merit. 


Publishing of the 2003 Uniform Plumbing Code was a significant milestone because it 
was the first time in the history of the United States a plumbing code was developed 
through a true consensus process. The 2024 edition represents the most current 
approaches in the plumbing field and is the eighth edition developed under the ANSI 
consensus process. Contributions to the content of this code consists of diverse interests 
as consumers, enforcing authorities, installers/maintainers, labor, manufacturers, 
research/standards/ testing laboratories, special experts, and users. 


The Uniform Plumbing Code provides consumers with safe and sanitary plumbing 
systems while, at the same time, allowing latitude for innovation and new technologies. 
The public at large is invited and encouraged to take part in IAPMO’s open consensus 
code development process. This code is updated every three years. The Uniform 
Plumbing Code is dedicated to all those who, in working to achieve "the ultimate 
plumbing code," have unselfishly devoted their time, effort, and personal funds to create 
and maintain this, the finest plumbing code in existence today. 


The Uniform Plumbing Code updates every three years in revision cycles that begin twice 
each year that takes two years to complete. 


Each revision cycle advances according to a published schedule that includes final dates 
for all major events and contains four basic steps as follows: 

1. Proposal Stage; 

2. Comment Stage; 

3. Association Technical Meeting; 

4. Council Appeals and Issuance of Code. 


IAPMO develops "full consensus" codes built on a foundation of maximum participation and 
agreement by a broad range of interests. This philosophy has led to producing technically 
sound codes that promote health and safety, yet do not stifle design or development. 


It is important to stress that the process remains committed to the principles of consensus 
code development where consensus Technical Committees and Correlating Committees 
revise codes. The public and membership are offered multiple opportunities to debate, 
provide input and raise concerns through Amending Motions at the annual Assembly 
Consideration Session. Anyone may submit an appeal related to the issuance of a document 
through the IAPMO Standards Council. 


The 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code is supported by the ASSE International (ASSE), 
Mechanical Contractors Association of America (MCAA), the Plumbing-Heating-Cooling 
Contractors National Association (PHCC-NA), the United Association (UA), and the World 
Plumbing Council (WPC). The presence of these logos, while reflecting support, does not 
imply any ownership of the copyright to the UPC, which is held exclusively by IAPMO. 
Further, the logos of these associations indicate the support of IAPMO’s open consensus 
process being used to develop IAPMO's codes and standards. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xi 


FOREWORD 


The addresses of the organizations are as follows: 

ASSE - 18927 Hickory Creek Drive, Suite 220 • Mokena, IL 60448 • (708) 995-3019 

MCAA ~ 1385 Piccard Drive • Rockville, MD 20850 • (301) 869-5800 

РСА — 1385 Piccard Drive • Rockville, MD 20850 • (301) 869-5800 

PHCC-NA - 180 S Washington Street, Suite 100 • Falls Church, VA 22040-6808 • (800) 533-7694 
UA - Three Park Place • Annapolis, MD 21401 • (410) 269-2000 

WPC – Auf der Mauer 11 • 8021 Zurich, Switzerland • Secretariat @ worldplumbing.org 


Adoption 

The Uniform Plumbing Code is available for adoption and use by jurisdictions in the 
United States and Internationally. Its use within a governmental jurisdiction is 
accomplished through adoption by reference in accordance with applicable jurisdictional 
laws. At adoption, jurisdictions should insert the applicable information in bracketed words 
in the sample ordinance. The sample legislation for adoption of the Uniform Plumbing 
Code on page xx provides key components, regulations and resolutions. 


Revision Markings 

Solid vertical lines in the margins indicate a technical change from the requirements of the 
2021 edition. An arrow (<=) in the margin indicates where an entire section, paragraph, 
exception, figure, or table has been deleted, or an item in a list of items or a table has been 
deleted. 


A double right angle (<<) in the margin indicates that the text, table, or figure has been 
relocated within the code. The table found on page xxii points out the relocations in the 2024 
edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code. 


TIA TIA indicates that the revision is the result of a Tentative Interim Amendment. 
n For further information on tentative interim amendments see Section 5 of the IAPMO 
тд Regulations Governing Committee Projects available at https://www.iapmo.org/code- 


TIA development 


A reference in brackets [ ] following a section or paragraph indicates material that has been 
extracted from another document. A reference in brackets ( ) following a section or 
paragraph indicates material that has been extracted from another document and has been 
modified further by the Technical Committee. This reprinted material is not the complete 
and official position of the source document on the referenced subject that is represented 
by the standard in its entirety. Material contained in this document that is taken or extracted 
from NFPA standards is used with permission of the National Fire Protection Association. 
This material is not the complete and official position of the NFPA on the reference subject, 
which is represented solely by the relevant standard in its entirety. NFPA standards can be 
accessed at www.nfpa.org. In addition, this extracted material may include revisions or 
modifications developed through IAPMO's standards development process. Therefore, 
NFPA disclaims responsibility for the content of this code. 


Text that is extracted pursuant to IAPMO’s Extract Guidelines, but outside of the regular 
revision process is denoted with the use of the source document in the margin. This text is 
not fully processed by IAPMO in accordance with ANSI's public announcement consensus 
requirements for an American National Standard (ANS) nor approved by ANSI's Board of 
Standards Review. The next revision cycle processes such text in accordance with those 
requirements. 


xii 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


The format of the Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) arranges each chapter in accordance with a 
specific subject matter. However, Chapter 3 is dedicated to general requirements that are 
applicable to every chapter. The subject matters are divided as follows: 


| 
ნ 
D 
n 
L 
Е 
п 
E 
L 
7 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xiii 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


The following is a summary of the scope and intent of the provisions addressed within the chapters and appendices of the 
Uniform Plumbing Code: 


hapter 1 Administration, 


regulates the application, enforcement, and administration of subsequent requirements of the code. As well as 
establishing the scope of the code, this chapter is concerned with enforcing the requirements contained in the body of the 
code. A plumbing code, as with any other code, is intended to be adopted as a legally enforceable document to safeguard 
health, safety, property, and public welfare. The code cannot be effective without satisfactory provisions for its administration 
and enforcement. The Authority Having Jurisdiction is to review the proposed and completed work and to decide whether a 
plumbing system conforms to the code requirements. As a public servant, the Authority Having Jurisdiction enforces the code 
in an unbiased, proper manner. The design professional is responsible for the design of a safe plumbing system. The 
contractor is responsible for installing the system in accordance with the plans. 


hapter 2 Definitions. 


To maintain consistency and encourage the use of common terminology [Chapter 2] establishes definitions to provide clarity of 
terms and promote the use of a common language throughout the code. Understanding definitions within the context of their 
application enables greater collaboration, efficiency, standardization, and interpretation in applying and enforcing terms used 
throughout the code. Codes are technical documents, and every term can impact the meaning of the code text. Terms not 
defined have a normally accepted meaning. 


hapter 3 General Regulations. 


[Chapter 3 kegulates the general requirements, not specific to other chapters, for installing plumbing systems. Many 
regulations are not specific plumbing requirements but relate to the overall plumbing system. This chapter contains safety 
requirements for installing plumbing and also contains nonplumbing requirements for identifying pipes, pipe fittings, traps, 
fixtures, materials, and devices used in plumbing systems. Listing method of approval, based on applicable nationally 
recognized standards, for the safe and proper installation of plumbing systems, is essential to ensure the protection of public 
health, safety, and welfare. The safety requirements provide protection for piping, material, and structures, with provisions for 
installation practices, removing stress and strain of the pipe, sleeving, and hanger support. The building's structural stability is 
protected by the regulations for cutting and notching of structural members. 


hapter 4 Plumbing Fixtures and Fixture Fittings. 


This chapter regulates the minimum number of plumbing fixtures of a specific type and quality for each building. The fixtures 
must be properly installed to be usable by the individuals occupying the building. The quality and design of every fixture must 
conform to the applicable referenced standard. Compliance with this chapter will result in a building or structure having 
acceptable plumbing fixtures for the sanitary, hygienic, cleaning, washing, and food preparation needs of the occupants. In 
addition to ensuring resilient fixtures, the chapter also takes into consideration gender-neutral facilities and contains provisions 
for privacy compartments. 


hapter 5 Water Heaters 


regulates the design, approval, installation, and safety devices of fuel burning and other types of water heaters with 
the combustion air requirements for ventilation and dilution of flue gases for appliances installed in buildings. This chapter 
does not apply to direct-vent appliances. In addition, this chapter regulates the design, construction, installation, and 
maintenance of chimneys, vents, and their connections to fuel-burning appliances. Methods to supply combustion air may be 
supplied from an indoor air supply, outdoor air supply, a combination of indoor and outdoor air supply, mechanical air supply, 
or an engineered system. Combustion air provisions are based on the number of openings and the total opening size required 
based on the total energy input rating of the appliance. An acceptable air supply for combustion and ventilation is necessary 
for the proper operation of fuel-burning appliances. A shortage of combustion air can result in incomplete combustion and the 
production of poisonous gases, such as carbon monoxide or appliance overheating. Ventilation air provides cooling for the 
appliance casing and internal controls. Inadequate ventilation of the space in which an appliance is installed can result in 
increased surrounding temperatures that stress the appliance itself or other appliances in the vicinity. 


xiv 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


hapter 6 Water Supply and Distribution 


regulates the design, material, and installation of water supply and distribution systems, including residential fire 
sprinklers. The water supply and distribution system is designed to achieve the correct water pressure and flow rates and 
avoid cross-connections. For fixtures to perform properly, an acceptable supply of potable water is essential to their operation 
and use. Cross-connections and backflow are ranked as the highest priority because of the long history of recognized health 
risks posed by cross-connections, outbreaks, or cases of waterborne disease. Piping materials and components are 
evaluated for their possible effect on the potable water with which they are in contact. The intent is to control the potential 
adverse health effects produced by indirect additives, products, and materials that come in contact with potable water. When 
selecting materials for water supply and distribution systems, consider water pressure, water temperature, compatibility with 
the water supply, durability, support, and sustainability. 


In addition, this chapter regulates the design, location, materials, and installation of multipurpose and stand-alone sprinkler 
systems that do not include the use of antifreeze. Where systems are installed as a portion of the water distribution system 
under the requirements of this chapter and are not provided with a fire department connection, backflow protection for the 
water supply system is not required. 


Chapter 7 Sanitary Drainage. 


This chapter regulates the design and installation of sanitary drainage systems to ensure they will work as intended. Drainage 
piping should not be oversized nor undersized, and constructed of approved materials to guard against fouling, deposit of 
solids, clogging, and with cleanouts so arranged that the pipes may be readily cleaned. The purpose of the sanitary drainage 
system is to remove effluent discharged from plumbing fixtures and other equipment to an approved point of disposal, such as 
a public sanitary system or private sewage disposal system. 


The basics of a sanitary drainage system include public and private sewage disposal; selection of materials; installation of the 
building drain and sewer; joining methods for pipe and fittings; drainage fixture units for sizing the drainage system; sumps 
and ejectors; vent sizing and length of vents; and testing. 


Chapter 8 Indirect Wastes. 


Chapter 8 regulates indirect waste connections that are required for plumbing fixtures and plumbing appliances dealing with 
food preparation, dishwashing, potable liquids, and similar equipment. An indirect connection prevents sewage from backing 
up into a fixture or appliance, thus providing protection against potential health hazards. The waste pipe discharges through 
an air gap or air break into a waste receptor or standpipe. The protection in the form of an air gap is necessary when the 
contamination is a potential health hazard or cross connection with the potable water system. Where there is no possibility of 
contaminating the potable water (nonpotable discharge), the indirect waste pipe may connect in the form of an air break. This 
method is often preferred to prevent splashing. In addition, health care facilities and special wastes must be protected from 
contamination that may result from the connection to the drainage system. The waste must be treated to prevent any damage 
to the piping or sewage treatment process. Waste receptors are sized and designed to prevent splashing and allow for peak 
discharge conditions. 


Chapter 9 Vents. 


Chapter 9 regulates the material, design, and installation of vents. A vent system is a pipe or pipes installed in a drainage 
system that provide a flow of air to and from the system to ventilate it, provide a circulation of air to eliminate trap siphonage, 
and reduce back-pressure and vacuum surge. In addition, vents provide the rapid and silent flow of waste without exposing 
occupants of the building to any sewer gases. Proper installation of vents is crucial, as a telltale sign that there is a problem in 
the drain and vent system is related to the elevation of the horizontal portion of the venting. Venting is not limited to sanitary 
drainage systems. Venting methods are applicable to other drainage systems such as those for chemical waste, graywater 
waste, and clear water waste. Sizing the venting system is directly tied to the design of the drainage system. For example, the 
velocities in the drainage system and its peak flow rates affect the diameters in the venting system. Where the vertical 
distance between a fixture outlet and trap is excessive, velocities in the entire drainage system will be greater than those in 
the vent sizing table. All venting methods in this chapter are categorized as either dry vents or wet vents. Vent stacks, stack 
vents, branch vents, island vents, relief vents, and individual vents are dry vents. Wet vents (horizontal or vertical), circuit 
vents, combination drain and vents are versions of "wet venting" in which the vent is wetted by drainage flow. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE XV 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


Chapter 10 Traps and Interceptors. 

Chapter 10 regulates the material, design, and installation of traps, interceptors, and separators. Traps are required on 
drainage type plumbing fixtures and must be self-scouring without interior partitions. Interceptors, on the other hand, are 
designed to control what goes down a drain. Interceptors are used to keep harmful substances from entering the sanitary 
drainage system, such as grease, sand, oil and other materials. The retained materials need periodic removal to maintain 
efficiency and function of the separating device. The capacity of an interceptor is based on retention and flow rate. There are 
many types of interceptors that are used at beauty salons, hospitals, meat, fish or foul packaging, refineries, repair garages, 
gas stations, car washing facilities, various plants, factories, and processing sites. The designer of the building is responsible 
for locating interceptors with the expectation for the frequency of maintenance, ease of cleaning and floor space for 
equipment. 


Chapter 11 Storm Drainage. 


Chapter 11 regulates the removal of stormwater from roofs, yards, paved areas, and similar areas. The objective of storm 
drainage systems is to provide a conduit or channel through which runoff will be carried from a point of collection to a point of 
disposal; this protects the property and the public from the uncontrolled flow of runoff and ensures that drains and inlets are 
adequately sized to receive the volume of runoff that flows to the drains. For the purpose of system design, it's necessary to 
specify the duration of a selected storm. All methods used to determine volumes and peak flow use historical data. Drain 
location must be coordinated with the architectural design of the building. When selecting the type of roof drain to use, the roof 
construction and its thickness, along with the intended use of the roof, are required. Where the roof perimeter extends above 
the roof in such a manner that water is entrapped and causes ponding, or if any portion of the roof is designed so water can 
pond, secondary drainage is required. Where secondary drainage is required, scuppers, or a secondary system of roof drains 
and pipes, are installed to prevent the accumulation of excessive rainwater. 


Chapter 12 Fuel Gas Piping. 


Chapter 12 regulates the installation of gas piping in a building, structure or within the property lines of buildings up to 5 psi. 
Gas piping systems must supply the minimum volume of gas required by each gas appliance to perform their proper operation 
under working conditions without exceeding the maximum pressure specified by each manufacturer. Because of the hazards 
associated with fuel gas, it is important to ensure the gas system has been inspected and tested, and that it is safe to turn on 
the gas supply to the building. 


Chapter 13 Health Care Facilities and Medical Gas and Medical Vacuum Systems. 


Chapter 13 regulates the installation, inspection, testing, maintenance, performance, and safe practices for medical gas and 
vacuum systems located in health care facilities. This chapter addresses the installation and maintenance of health care 
fixtures, devices, and equipment. The purpose of medical gas and medical vacuum systems is to provide safe and sufficient 
flows at required pressures to the medical gas outlet or vacuum inlet terminals. System design and layout should allow 
convenient access by the medical staff to outlet and inlet terminals, valves, and equipment during patient care or 
emergencies, as safety is of primary concern. 


Chapter 14 Firestop Protection. 


Chapter 14 regulates piping penetrations of fire-resistance-rated walls, partitions, floors, floor and ceiling assemblies, roof and 
ceiling assemblies, or shaft enclosures through firestopping. To firestop is to create a physical barrier that impedes the spread 
of smoke, gases, and flames from one compartment in the building design to the next. The firestop is seen as a part that is 
essential to protecting the lives of people who live or work in the structure, increasing the chances of not succumbing to 
smoke or gases before they are able to evacuate the building. Fireproofing of this type helps to restore the fire-resistant 
properties of the building materials before the openings were created as part of the construction process. 


Chapter 15 Alternate Water Sources for Nonpotable Applications. 


Chapter 15 regulates gray water sources, reclaimed (recycled) water sources and on-site treated nonpotable water systems. 
Water sources include subsurface irrigation, subsoil irrigation, and mulch basin systems. Subsoil water irrigation provides a 
means to disperse shallow drip irrigation lines and mulch basins that collect and spread water in various applications. The 


xvi 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


reclaimed water provisions to on-site nonpotable water systems include gray water and other nonpotable water sources that 
are used for on-site applications. Water reuse is integral to sustainable water management because it allows water to remain 
in the environment and be preserved for future use while meeting the water requirements of the present. Water reuse reduces 
energy use by removing added potable water treatment, offsetting water demands, and providing water for energy production. 


Chapter 16 Nonpotable Rainwater Catchment Systems. 


Chapter 16 regulates nonpotable rainwater catchment systems that include irrigation; toilet and urinal flushing with proper 
treatment; provisions where permits are required; maintenance of alternate water sources; and minimum water quality. This 
chapter provides guidance on how to optimize rainwater use while ensuring there is a decrease of risk to consumers from 
poor design, installation, and maintenance. Rainwater harvesting is the process of capturing, channeling, and storing water 
runoff for later use. Most systems are constructed of three principal components: the catchment area, the collection device, 
and the conveyance system. 


Chapter 17 Referenced Standards. 


Chapter 17 provides two comprehensive tables with referenced standards. The standards listed in Table 1701.1 are applied 
as indicated in the applicable reference section(s). A list of additional approved standards, publications, practices, and guides 
that are not referenced in specific sections appear in Table 1701.2. 


Referenced standards set forth specific details of accepted practices, materials specifications, or test methods in many 
specialized applications. Standards provide an efficient method of conveying complex information and specifications on the 
performance requirements for materials, products, systems, application, and installation. The manner and purpose for a 
standard's use and, in turn, code compliance, must be definitive in all references to the standard. If the standard is intended to 
be a requirement for judging code compliance, the code must state its intent for use. The standard should adequately address 
a defined need and at the same time specify the minimum performance requirements, technical characteristics and methods 
of testing, and required test results. 


The referenced standards tables are organized in a manner that makes it easy to find specific standards in alphabetical order, 
and by acronym of the publishing agency of the standard. The tables list the title of the standard, the edition, and any 
addenda. Contact information for each publishing agency is provided at the end of the chapter. 


Appendix A Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System. 


Appendix A provides a method of sizing the water supply and distribution system that provides precise calculations to 
establish the proper pressures and flow to the system's fixtures. The goal of sizing the system is to deliver an acceptable 
volume of water to the most hydraulically remote fixture during minimum pressure and maximum flow conditions; provide 
satisfactory water pressure to the most hydraulically remote fixture during minimum pressure and maximum flow conditions; 
and to prevent excessive water velocity during maximum flow conditions. 


Appendix B Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent Systems. 

Appendix B contains general guidelines for the design and installation of combination waste and vent systems. These 
systems are designed for waste piping and are purposely oversized to serve as both a waste and vent pipe to avoid excessive 
pneumatic effects at fixture drains. 


Appendix C Alternate Plumbing Systems. 


The intent of this appendix is to provide clarification of procedures for the design and approval of engineered plumbing 
systems, alternate materials, and equipment that are not specifically covered in other parts of the code. Alternative methods 
are allowed to be used where approved by the authority having jurisdiction. Approval of alternatives is based on a 
demonstration showing that the method or material used is at least equivalent in strength, deflection, and capacity to that 
provided by the prescriptive methods and materials. 


Appendix D Sizing Storm Water Drainage Systems. 


Appendix D provides general guidelines for the sizing of stormwater drainage systems. There are two pieces of information 
that must always be a given. They are the roof size and the rate of rainfall for the area. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xvii 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


Appendix E Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks. 


The provisions of this appendix apply to the plumbing and drainage systems of mobile home and recreational vehicle parks. 
These provisions also apply to the use, maintenance, and installation for supplying fuel gas, water, electricity, and disposal of 
sewage from accessory buildings or structures, and building components. 


Appendix F Firefighter Breathing Air Replenishment Systems. 


Appendix F provides guidance on installing firefighter breathing air replenishment systems. System components include 
outside fire department connection panel, interior air fill panel or station, interconnected piping distribution system and 
pressure monitoring switch. Fire departments access the system through an outside connection panel and are able to pump 
air into the system. The firefighters inside the structure access the system at fill stations that are found throughout the 
building. The piping distribution system is made from stainless tubing or other approved materials. It delivers compressed air 
to the building's interior air-fill stations and interior air-fill panels. The tubing also acts as a conduit in the interior of the building 
between the outside connection panel and the air storage system. If the system becomes over-pressurized, the air monitoring 
system also acts as a pressure relief. A system isolation valve is placed alongside each interior air fill station and interior air fill 
panel to isolate the system. 


Appendix G Sizing of Venting Systems. 


Appendix G provides added information on the sizing of gas vents. This appendix is useful to the end user for the proper sizing 
of venting systems. A series of examples are given that show how to use the tables and other requirements of Chapter 5. 


Appendix H Private Sewage Disposal Systems. 


Appendix H provides general guidelines for the materials, design, and installation of new or existing private sewage disposal 
systems. Where a building cannot be served by a public sewer system, the building site must be provided with a system for 
treating the wastewater generated from the use of plumbing fixtures in the building. The appendix addresses site evaluations, 
materials, soil absorption systems, holding tanks, cesspools, and on-site wastewater treatment systems. Private sewage 
disposal systems must be designed based on the soil conditions, constructed using approved materials, and installed 
according to prescribed dimensions. 


Appendix I Installation Standards. 


Installation standards are industry standards that specify procedures for the installation of plumbing and mechanical products, 
and the inspection methods and procedures employed for the examination of such systems. These comprehensive standards 
add detailed information and guidance that a manufacturer or product installation instructions may not fully address. These 
standards give the user confidence with options from industry experts for installing plumbing products and assemblies in a 
safe and professional manner. 


Appendix J Combination of Indoor and Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Design. 


Appendix J provides an example of how to determine the required combination of indoor and outdoor combustion air opening 
sizes for appliances. The combustion air example also provides a table that contains the required volume of a space per the 
appliance Btu/h input that is based on the standard method. 


Appendix K Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems. 


Potable rainwater catchment system is defined as a system that uses the principal of collecting and using rain from a rooftop 
or other man-made, aboveground collection surface. This appendix applies to new rainwater catchment installations, as well 
as changes, additions, maintenance, and repairs to existing installations. Rainwater harvesting is the practice of collecting the 
water produced during rainfall events before it has a chance to run off into a river or stream or soak into the ground and 
become groundwater. 


Appendix L Sustainable Practices. 


This appendix provides a comprehensive set of technically sound provisions that encourage sustainable practices and works 
toward improving the design and construction of plumbing systems that result in a positive long-term environmental impact. 
Environmental sustainability is important because it involves natural resources that human beings need for economic or 
manufactured capital. Their sustainability is defined by their reliance on infinitely available resources that are naturally 
occurring, constant, and free to access. 


xviii 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FORMAT OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


Appendix M Peak Water Demand Calculator. 


This appendix provides a method for estimating the demand load for the building water supply and principal branches for 
single- and multi-family dwellings with water-conserving plumbing fixtures, fixture fittings, and appliances. 


Appendix N Impact Of Water Temperature On The Potential For Scalding And Legionella Growth. 


Legionnaires' disease is a serious issue that is a threat to many citizens. It is known that the higher the temperature, the lower 
the risk for Legionella growth, but the higher the temperature, the higher the possibility for scalding. This appendix addresses 
Legionella growth potential and scald potential within specified temperature ranges. It contains definitions for terms used to 
describe water temperatures such as cold, tepid, warm, tempered hot, and disinfecting hot. Since plumbing systems operate 
within various temperature ranges, the public has a document that identifies such temperature ranges and the "potential" 
dangers within these temperature ranges. 


Appendix O Non-Sewered Sanitation Systems. 

This appendix contains provisions on non-sewered sanitation systems which are suitable for use in temporary or permanent 
settlements, including refugee camps, and are equally suited to both public and private use in isolated locations. Additionally, 
the appendix provides general safety and performance requirements for design and testing of non-sewered sanitation 
systems for prefabricated integrated treatment units. These systems will apply to any integrated sanitation system that is not 
attached to a sewer. 


Appendix P Professional Qualifications. 


Appendix P provides a baseline of knowledge for installers, inspectors, or employers working with and around the systems 
covered within the scope of this code to keep all persons safe and healthy. 


Appendix Q Indoor Horticultural Facilities. 


Appendix Q addresses plumbing systems for horticultural cultivation and processing of plants for human ingestion, inhalation, 
and topical application. The appendix provisions apply to primary and secondary horticultural facilities. Primary horticultural 
facilities are devoted to the growing and/or harvesting of plants. Cultivation rooms are located within these facilities, while a 
secondary horticultural facility is devoted to the harvesting (such as hulling or shelling), packing, and/or holding of plants. 


Appendix R Tiny Houses. 


Appendix R guidance for the tiny house communities including regulations for fixtures, approved materials, and provisions for 
protecting the potable water system. This appendix serves as a foundation to establish safe practices and requirements that 
will provide a safe, healthy, and reliable plumbing system for the tiny house. 


Appendix S Onsite Stormwater Treatment Systems. 


Appendix S provides provisions for the water quality, monitoring, design, construction, alteration, repair, and operation 
requirements of onsite stormwater treatment systems for nonpotable use. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xix 


SAMPLE LEGISLATION FOR ADOPTION OF THE UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


The Uniform Codes are designed to be adopted by jurisdictions through an ordinance. Jurisdictions wishing to 
adopt the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code as an enforceable regulation governing plumbing systems by reference 
should ensure the legal basis under which adoption and implementation are included in the ordinance. 


The following sample ordinance is a guide for drafting an ordinance for adoption that addresses key components 
regulations and resolutions. 


ORDINANCE NO. 


An ordinance of the [JURISDICTION] adopting the 2024 edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code, regulating and 
controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, 
relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the [JURISDICTION]; providing 
for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; repealing Ordinance No. of the [JURISDICTION] and 
all other ordinances and parts of the ordinances in conflict therewith. 


The [GOVERNING BODY] of the [JURISDICTION] does ordain as follows: 


Section 1 Codes Adopted by Reference. That certain documents, three (3) copies of which are on file in the 
office of the [JURISDICTION'S KEEPER OF RECORDS] and the [JURISDICTION], being marked and 
designated as the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code, including Appendix Chapters [FILL IN THE APPENDIX 
CHAPTERS BEING ADOPTED], as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical 
Officials, be and is hereby adopted as the Code of the [JURISDICTION], in the State of [STATE NAME] 
regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, 
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; 
providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, 
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of such 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code on file in the office of the 
[JURISDICTION] are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance. 


Section 2 Modifications. The following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Insert: [NAME OF JURISDICTION] 
Section 104.5. Insert: [APPROPRIATE FEE SCHEDULE] 


Section 3 Conflicting Ordinances Repealed. That Ordinance No. of [JURISDICTION] entitled 
[TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE OR ORDINANCES IN EFFECT AT THE PRESENT TIME SO THAT THEY WILL BE 
REPEALED BY MENTION] and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. 


Section 4 Preemption. [JURISDICTION] hereby fully occupies and preempts the entire field of regulation of 
design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, 
replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems; and provision for the issuance of permits 
and collection of fees therefor; within the boundaries of [JURISDICTION]. [AS APPROPRIATE] Cities, towns, 
and counties or other municipalities may enact only those laws and ordinances relating to this field as 
specifically authorized by state law and consistent with this ordinance. Local laws and ordinances that are 
inconsistent with, more restrictive than, or exceed the requirements of [ORDINANCE NO.] shall not be enacted 
and are hereby expressly preempted and repealed, regardless of the nature of the code, charter, or home rule 
status of such city, town, county, or municipality. 


Section 5 Severability. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is, for any 
reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this 
ordinance. The [GOVERNING BODY] hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each 
section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, 
sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 


Section 6 Legal Notice. That the [JURISDICTION'S KEEPER OF RECORDS] is hereby ordered and directed to 
cause this ordinance to be published. (An additional provision may be required to direct the number of times the 
ordinance is to be published and to specify that it is to be in a newspaper in general circulation. Posting may 
also be required.) 


Section 7 Violations and Penalties. [INCORPORATE PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS] 


Section 8 Effective Date. That this ordinance and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders and 
matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full force and effect [TIME PERIOD] from and 
after the date of its final passage and adoption. 


Xx 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


COMMITTEE ON UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE 


These lists represent the membership at the time the Committee was balloted on the final text of this edition. Since that time, changes in the 


membership may have occurred. 


IAPMO Standards Council 
Bill Erickson, Chairperson 
CJ Erickson Plumbing Company [I/M] 


JT Baca, State of New Mexico [E] 

Laura Ceja, United Association [L] 

Rick Coffman, City of Cedar Falls, Retired [C] 

Marty Cooper, Vice Chairperson, City of Foster City [E] 


Jim Imprescia, City of Leominster [E] 

Doug Marian, District Council 16 [L] 

Jim Stack, Stack Plumbing, Inc. [I/M] 

Don Summers, Plumber's & Pipefitters Training Center [L] 


Nonvoting 


Gabriella M. Davis, Secretary, IAPMO 


Hugo Aguilar, Recording Secretary, IAPMO 


IAPMO Uniform Plumbing Code Technical Committee 
Dan Daniels, Chairperson, Self [C] 


Bob Adler, 4Leaf, Inc. [E] 
Sarah Aguilar, McCabe Plumbing [I/M] 
Rawand Aryan, City of Los Angeles Department of 
Building & Safety [E] 
Julius Ballanco, JB Engineering & Code Consulting [SE] 
DJ Berger, National ITC Corporation [U] 
Gary Bonetti, UA Local #342 JATC [L] 
Jeremy Brown, NSF International [R/S/T] 
Michael Cudahy, Plastic Pipe & Fittings Association (PPFA) [M] 
Pennie Feehan, Copper Development Association (CDA) [M] 
Brian Fenty, Self [E] 
Ed Gormley, Gormley Plumbing & Mechanical [I/M] 
Lingyan Gorsuch, Arup [SE] 


Ephraim Kreitenberg, Kreit Mechanical Associates, Inc. [SE] 

David Mann, CA State Pipe Trades Council [L] 

John Nielsen, State of Idaho — Division of Building Safety [E] 

Johnnie Norris, United Association [L] 

Phil Ribbs, PHR Consultants [SE] 

Arnold Rodio, Pace Setter Plumbing [I/M] 

Brad Senecaut, City of Hillsboro [E] 

Robert Sewell, Lescure Company [U] 

Larry Soskin, ACE Duraflo [M] 

Billy Smith, American Society of Plumbing Engineers (ASPE) [SE] 

Don Taylor, Dittmann Plumbing [U] 

Chuck White, Plumbing-Heating-Cooling Contractors National 
Association (PHCC-NA) [I/M] 


Alternates 


David Orton, NSF International [R/S/T] 
Dan Rademacher, United Association [L] 
Martin Salberg, Pace Setter Plumbing [I/M] 
Kevin Sullivan, UA Local #342 JATC [L] 


Chris Cheek, National ITC Corporation [U] 

Richard Church, Plastic Pipe & Fittings Association (PPFA) [M] 
Tim Knight, UA Local #342 JATC [L] 

Ramiro Mata, American Society of Plumbing Engineers (ASPE) [SE] 


Nonvoting 


Matthew Barker, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) [R/S/T] Alexander Ing, National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) [R/S/T] 
David Gans, Ex-Officio, IAPMO [E] Doug Marian, ASSE [R/S/T] 
Enrique Gonzalez, ІАРМО Staff Liaison 


COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP CLASSIFICATION ABBREVIATIONS 


These classifications apply to Technical Committee members and represent their principal interest in the activity of a committee. 


M Manufacturer: A representative of a maker or marketer of a product, assembly or system, or portion thereof, that is affected by the 
standard. 

U User: A representative of an entity that is subject to the provisions of the standard or that voluntarily uses the standard. 

VM  Installer/Maintainer: A representative of an entity that is in the business of installing or maintaining a product, assembly or system 
affected by the standard. 

L Labor: A labor representative or employee concerned with safety in the workplace. 

R/S/T Research/Standards/Testing Laboratory: ^ representative of an independent research organization; an organization that develops 
codes, standards or other similar documents; or an independent testing laboratory. 

E Enforcing Authority: A representative or an agency or an organization that promulgates and/or enforces standards. 

[e Consumer: A person who is, or represents, the ultimate purchaser of a product, system, or service affected by the standard, but who is 
not included in the User classification. 

SE Special Expert: A person not representing any of the previous classifications, but who has special expertise in the scope of the standard or 
portion thereof. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xxi 


SECTION RELOCATION 


2024 Location 


2021 Location 


2024 Location 


2021 Location 


206.0 Diverter Valve, Gray 
Water 


209.0 Gray Water Diverter 
Valve 


L 411.14 - L 411.14.3 


L 411.10 - L 411.10.3 


212.0 Joint, Heat-Fusion 


210.0 Heat-Fusion Weld Joints 


L411.16 -L 411.17 


L 411.12 - L 411.13 


Table L 502.7.1 


Table L 502.7 


L 503.2.1 


L 503.2 


N 102.1 


N 102.1 - N 102.10 


408.3 - 408.4.2 408.2 - 408.3.2 
408.5 - 408.11 408.4 - 408.10 
409.6.2 409.6.1 

422.1.2 422.1.1 

507.21 - 507.26 507.22 - 507.27 
509.8.1 509.8.2 

Figure 509.8.1 Figure 509.8 


Table 509.8.1 


Table 509.8.2 


509.8.2, 509.8.3 


509.8.4, 509.8.5 


509.10.7 - 509.10.13.1 


509.10.6 - 509.10.12.1 


603.5.20 - 603.5.22 


603.5.19 - 603.5.21 


607.3 - 607.6 


607.2 - 607.5 


1017.4 


1017.2 


1208.2 - 1208.5.1 


1208.3 - 1208.6.1 


Table 1208.3.1 


Table 1208.4.1 


1208.5.2 - 1208.5.8.2 


1208.6.3 - 1208.6.9.2 


Table 1208.5.8.2 


Table 1208.6.9.2 


1208.5.8.3 - 1208.7.3 


1208.6.9.3 - 1208.8.3 


1208.7.4 


1208.8.4 


1208.7.5 - 1208.14.1 


1208.8.7 - 1208.15.1 


1212.1.2, 1212.1.3 


1212.1.1, 1212.1.2 


1323.13.3, 1323.13.4 


1323.13.2, 1323.13.3 


1326.4 - 1326.10 


1326.5 - 1326.11 


1505.6 - 1505.14 


1505.5 - 1505.13 


Figure 1505.10 


Figure 1505.9 


1506.6 - 1506.13 


1506.5 - 1506.12 


1603.3 - 1603.4 


1603.4 - 1603.5 


Table 1603.4 


Table 1603.5 


1603.5 - 1603.19 


1603.6 - 1603.20 


1603.20 


1503.2.4 


L 402.9 - L 402.11 


L 402.8 - L 402.10 


L 404.9 - L 404.12 


L 404.8 - L 404.11 


L 411.5, L 411.6 


L 411.2, L411.3 


L 411.7 


L 411.4 


L411.9-L 411.12 


L411.5- L 411.8 


xxii 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Guo 
=>. 


RELATED PUBLICATIONS AND SERVICES 


The Documents Listed are Not by this Reference Adopted by The State of California. 


IAPMO provides a variety of other products which are useful for inspectors, building officials, architects, engineers, 
manufacturers, contractors, plumbers, and apprentices. 


IAPMO Headquarters Directory 
4755 East Philadelphia Street, Ontario, California 91761-2816 
Publication Order Desk Phone: 800-85-IAPMO 
Publication Toll Free Fax: 877-85-CODES 
E-mail: iapmo@iapmo.org 
Website: www.iapmo.org 
Free Code Question: 800-201-0335 


Uniform Plumbing Code – 2024 Edition: 


The Uniform Plumbing Code is the most widely adopted plumbing code in the world. The 2024 edition contains complete 
“turnkey” requirements for the installation and maintenance of plumbing systems, all in one easy to use book. 


Uniform Plumbing Code Illustrated Training Manual: 


The UPC Illustrated Training Manual is an excellent reference for anyone involved in the plumbing industry. It contains an 
extensive definitions section and several hundred comprehensive technical diagrams and illustrations. It serves as a textbook, 
and it also 1s useful as a valuable tool for explaining the intent and use of the Code. 


Uniform Plumbing Code Study Guide: 


This book is the perfect complement to the UPC Illustrated Training Manual. Alone, it constitutes a complete self-study 
course for learning the UPC. It has hundreds of questions, general practice exams, and plumbing math, pipe sizing exercises 
and fitting identification. A big help in getting you ready for a certification exam! 


Guide to Important Code Questions to the Uniform Plumbing Code: 


An excellent reference for learning and understanding plumbing code changes and identifies code changes between editions. 
It is a useful tool for preparing code change proposals. 


Uniform Mechanical Code — 2024 Edition: 


The Uniform Mechanical Code contains complete requirements for the installation and maintenance of heating, ventilating, 
cooking and refrigeration systems. 


Uniform Mechanical Code Illustrated Training Manual: 


Contains technical diagrams and illustrations that demonstrate the intent and use of the UMC. A great reference for everyone 
involved in Mechanical HVACR design and installation. 


Uniform Mechanical Code Study Guide: 


The Study Guide is a complete self-study course for learning the UMC. A big help in getting ready for a certification exam! 
This book is the perfect complement to the UMC Illustrated Training Manual. 


Guide to Important Code Questions to the Uniform Mechanical Code: 


An excellent reference for learning and understanding mechanical code changes and identifies code changes between 
editions. It is a useful tool for preparing code change proposals. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE xxiii 


RELATED PUBLICATIONS AND SERVICES 


The Documents Listed are Not by this Reference Adopted by The State of California. 


Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa, and Hot Tub Code — 2024 Edition: 
The Uniform Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code contains complete and current requirements for the erection, 
installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to and use or maintenance of these systems. 


Uniform Solar, Hydronics and Geothermal Code — 2024 Edition: 


The Uniform Solar, Hydronics and Geothermal Code contains complete requirements for the erection, installation, alteration, 
addition, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of these systems. 


Drain Waste and Vent Calculator: 
A slide-rule style calculator provides quick and simple access to the fixture unit and sizing tables of Chapter 7 of the UPC. 


Water Sizing Calculator: 
Sizing water systems becomes a much simpler task with the use of this handy slide-rule style calculator. 


Natural Gas Pipe Sizing Calculator: 
This Natural Gas Pipe Sizing Calculator is presented in an easy to use and read slide-rule format. Designed for systems with 
a supply pressure of six to eight inches of water column, all pipe capacities are given in cubic feet per hour. 


Trailer Standards: 
IAPMO has developed a number of standards for specialty products used in manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. 
These standards are available individually, or they may be purchased as a set. 


Education and Training Seminars: 

IAPMO specializes in conducting training and education, including fulfilling continuing education requirements, on the UPC 
and UMC as well as all of the most commonly utilized codes in the Construction Trades. Special seminars on industry or 
code subjects are expeditiously created and delivered upon request. Please call to obtain the seminar schedule or to arrange 
for a custom special seminar. 


Backflow Prevention Institute - [APMO: 

The IAPMO Backflow Prevention Institute provides professional education and training for the control of hazards to our 
water supply and is dedicated to water-system safety worldwide. The Institute provides training in backflow prevention and 
cross-connection control. This program includes backflow preventers, testers, repairers, cross-connection control surveyors, 
program administrators and fire-sprinkler backflow preventer testers. Each of these courses provides compliance certification 
to American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) Series 5000 Professional Qualification Standards. 


Backflow Prevention Reference Manual: 

This unique 300-page manual contains full-color illustrations and sections relating to real-world installations, backflow 
prevention, testing cross-connection control, repair and inspections. The manual is an excellent textbook and a reference the 
inspectors in every jurisdiction should have access too. It is also an important resource for system designers, urban planners 
and utility companies — professionals on both sides of the water meter. 


ANSI Z 124 Standards: 


These standards are written to specifically address a variety of plastic plumbing fixtures and components. They are available 
individually, or may be grouped for quantity discounts. 


IAPMO Installation Standards: 


IAPMO standards committees have formulated installation standards for a wide variety of commonly used plumbing 
materials and systems. The IAPMO installation standards are included after the text of the Uniform Plumbing Code, or can 
be purchased separately. 


xxiv 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


RELATED PUBLICATIONS AND SERVICES 


The Documents Listed are Not by this Reference Adopted by The State of California. 


Material and Property Standards: 


IAPMO does not generally develop material and property standards, but when a need exists the Association will take a 
leadership role by filling the void. They are available, are subject to amendments and are withdrawn when recognized 
consensus standards are formulated. 


OFFICIAL Magazine: 


IAPMO’s quarterly publication features informative articles related to Plumbing and Mechanical HVACR installations, 
award winning general interest features, technical columns and industry updates. Subscriptions are available and all IAPMO 
members receive a free copy of every issue! 


Membership in IAPMO: 


IAPMO membership is open to all interested persons. Membership categories include Student, Individual, Senior, 
Organizational and Governmental. Member benefits include discounted prices on IAPMO publications, a subscription to 
Official magazine, and numerous educational and training opportunities. 


HOW TO CONTACT IAPMO 
Mailing Address: 4755 East Philadelphia Street, Ontario, California 91761-2816 
Main Number: 909-472-4100 * Publication Orders: 800-85-IAPMO • Publication Fax: 877-85-CODES 
Website: www.iapmo.org * Office Hours: Monday — Friday, 8am — 5pm Pacific Time 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE XXV 


xxvi 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 1 


.1.0 
1.1 
.1.2 
1.3 
Л.А 
1.5 
1.6 


ე мы м м м м м 


1.1.7 
1.1.8 


1.1.9 
1.1.10 
1.1.11 
1.1.12 
1.2.0 
1.2.1 
1.2.2 
1.2.3 


1.3.0 


1.3.2 
1.4.0 
1.4.2 
1.5.0 


1.6.0 


1.6.2 
1.7.0 
1.7.2 
1.8.0 


1.8.1 
1.8.2 
1.8.3 
1.8.4 


1.8.5 
1.8.6 


ТАВІЕ ОҒ СОМТЕМТЅ 


DIVISION I 

CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION ... .1 
თ”-“აეყ„ყ“თ”ს'""""'!""""" ვ 
Title s oie der de aie 3 
Purpose თ” '''""''' ვ 
SCOPO თს“ ვ 
Appendices ................... 4 
Referenced Codes .............. 4 
Non-Building Standards, Orders, 

and Regulations ................ 4 
Order of Precedence and Use ....4 
City, County, or City and 

County Amendments, 

Additions or Deletions ........... 4 
Effective Date of this Code ....... 5 
Availability of Codes............. 5 
Format: oisi eee ce eed 5 
Validity. ited ae eit 5 
Building Standards Commission ...5 
BSG iun Oe ed У are ы 5 
BSC-CG ... зей oie нлар gabe s 6 


Alternate Materials, Design, 
and Methods of Construction 
and Equipment ................. 6 


Board of State and Community 
Corrections .................... 6 


Adopting Agency Identification ....7 
Department of Consumer Affairs ...7 
Adopting Agency Identification ....7 
Reserved for California 


Energy Commission ............. 7 
Department of Food 
and Agriculture ................. 7 


Adopting Agency Identification ....7 
Department of Public Health ...... 7 
Adopting Agency Identification ....7 
Department of Housing and 


Community Development ......... 7 
Purpose: i.e ese 7 
Authority and Abbreviations ....... 7 
Local Enforcing Agency .......... 8 


Permits, Fees, Applications, 
and Inspections ................ 9 


Right of Entry for Enforcement ....10 


Local Modification by 
Ordinance or Regulation ........ 10 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ე МА ასა o м м м м 


ე ს o o o o м м 


Lom 
= ~ 
A © 
о № 


CHAPTER 1 


101.0 
101.1 


Alternate Materials, Designs, Tests, 


and Methods of Construction ..... 10 
Appeals Board ................ 11 
Unsafe Buildings or Structures ...12 
Other Building Regulations ...... 12 
Division of the State Architect ....13 
Division of the State Architect — 

Access Compliance ............ 13 


Division of the State Architect — 
Structural Safety............... 13 
Department of Health Care 

Access and Information/Office 

of Statewide Hospital Planning 


and Development .............. 13 
OSHPD 1 and OSHPD 1R ....... 13 
ხუ ა-9””'”''''' 13 
იაია ას” ”””"""""" 14 
OSHPD 4 .................... 14 
OSHPD/5-.i::: 43 FG RS RS 14 
OSHPD.6: tac ipio eb edged 15 


Office of the State Fire Marshal .. .15 
SFM-Office of the 


State Fire Marshal ............. 15 
Duties and Powers of 

the Enforcing Agency ........... 16 
Construction Documents ........ 18 
РӨӨ$ v.n Ix RA ee ee 18 
Inspections ................... 19 
Certificate of Occupancy ........ 19 
Temporary Structures and Uses . .19 
Service Utilities ................ 19 
Stop Work Order .............. 19 
Unsafe Buildings, Structures, 

and Equipment ................ 19 


Adopting Agency Identification . ..19 
Reserved for the State Librarian ..19 


Department of Water 
Resources (DWR) ............. 19 


Application ................... 19 
Adopting Agency Identification . ..19 
Reserved for the State 


Lands Commission ............. 19 

DIVISION ІІ 

SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION . .21 

General... 45: 1x4 ime 21 

ITitle: sioe RE 21 
xxvii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


101.2 
101.3 
101.4 
101.5 
102.0 
102.1 
102.2 
102.3 
102.4 


102.5 
102.6 
102.7 
102.8 
103.0 


103.1 
103.2 
103.3 
103.4 
104.0 
104.1 
104.2 
104.3 
104.4 
104.5 
105.0 
105.1 
105.2 
105.3 
105.4 
106.0 
106.1 
106.2 
106.3 
106.4 
106.5 


106.6 
107.0 
107.1 
107.2 
Table 104.5 


CHAPTER 2 
201.0 
201.1 
202.0 
202.1 


xxviii 


56008. а gone x eR EDD ees 21 
Purpose =: we ve 21 
Unconstitutional ............... 21 
Validity cie elm 21 
Applicability ................... 21 
Conflicts Between Codes ........ 21 
Existing Installations ............ 21 
Maintenance .................. 21 
Additions, Alterations, 

Renovations, or Repairs ......... 21 
Health and Safety .............. 21 
Changes in Building Occupancy ...21 
Moved Structures .............. 21 
Appendices ................... 21 
Duties and Powers of the 

Authority Having Jurisdiction ..... 22 
General ...................... 22 
Liability: sss, enixe eR PER 22 
Applications and Permits ........ 22 
Right of Entry ................. 22 
Pertnits irs дыд ERI 22 
Permits Required .............. 22 
Exempt Work ................. 22 
Application for Permit ........... 22 
Permit Issuance ............... 23 
Fees ok ipee 24 
Inspections and Testing ......... 24 
Сепега!...................... 24 
Required Inspections ........... 24 
Testing of Systems ............. 25 
Connection to Service Utilities ....25 
Violations and Penalties ......... 25 
Сепега!...................... 25 
Notices of Correction or Violation . . .25 
Penalties ..................... 26 
Stop Orders .................. 26 
Authority to Disconnect 

Utilities in Emergencies ......... 26 
Authority to Condemn........... 26 
Board of Appeals .............. 26 
Сепега!...................... 26 
Limitations of Authority .......... 26 
Plumbing Permit Fees .......... 27 
DEFINITIONS ................. 29 
General ...................... 31 
Applicability ................... 31 
Definition of Terms ............. 31 
Сепега!...................... 31 


CHAPTER 3 
301.0 
301.1 
301.2 
301.3 


301.4 
301.5 
301.6 


301.7 
301.8 
302.0 
302.1 
303.0 
303.1 
304.0 


304.1 
305.0 


305.1 
306.0 
306.1 
306.2 
307.0 
307.1 
307.2 
308.0 
308.1 
309.0 
309.1 
309.2 
309.3 
309.4 
309.5 
309.6 
310.0 


310.1 
310.2 
310.3 
310.4 
310.5 
310.6 
310.7 
310.8 
310.9 


GENERAL REGULATIONS ...... 47 
General... sp Ex end 49 
Applicability ................... 49 
Minimum Standards ............ 49 
Alternate Materials and Methods 

of Construction Equivalency ...... 49 
Flood Hazard Areas ............ 49 
Alternative Engineered Design .. . .50 
Tall Wood (Mass Timber) 

Buildings: 22.4% seek кале anis 50 
Опе- and Two-Family Dwellings . .50 
ი„Iი”სსსს”ს"",))ს 50 
Iron Pipe Size (IPS) Pipe ........ 50 
C- -- “ს ”"''"'"' 50 
Disposal of Liquid Waste ........ 50 
C-.--–”""""""" 50 
Connections to Plumbing 

System Required .............. 50 
Әепегаі ...................... 50 
Damage to Drainage System 

or Public Sewer ............... 51 
Unlawful Practices ............. 51 
Industrial Wastes .............. 51 
Detrimental Wastes ............ 51 
Safe Discharge ................ 51 
Location «Po eser teu 51 
System «ce pP RAE 51 
Ownership ................... 51 
Prohibited Locations ............ 51 
General: iste ur EE 51 
Workmanship ................. 51 
Engineering Practices........... 51 
Concealing Imperfections ........ 51 
Burred Ends .................. 51 
Installation Practices............ 51 
Sound Transmission ............ 51 
DeadLegs ................... 51 
Prohibited Fittings and 

Practices x. ешш on bus 51 
ყია." tpe eos riu 51 
Drainage and Vent Piping ....... 51 
Waste Connection ............. 51 


Use of Vent and Waste Pipes ....51 


Obstruction of Flow ............ 51 
Dissimilar Metals .............. 51 
Direction of Flow............... 51 
Screwed Fittings ............... 51 
Female Plastic Connections ...... 52 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


310.10 
310.14 
310.15 


311.0 
311.1 
312.0 


312.1 
312.2 
312.3 


312.4 


312.5 
312.6 
312.7 
312.8 
312.9 
312.10 
312.11 
312.12 
313.0 
313.1 
313.2 
313.3 
313.4 
313.5 
313.6 
Table 313.6 
313.7 
314.0 


314.1 
314.2 
314.3 
314.4 
315.0 
315.1 
315.2 


316.0 
316.1 
317.0 
317.1 
318.0 
318.1 
318.2 
318.3 


ABS and PVC Transition Joints ...52 


Services/Systems and Utilities . . . .52 
Telephone and Data 

Equipment Rooms ............. 52 
Independent Systems ........... 52 
General “ი” EX ees 52 
Protection of Piping, Tubing, 
Materials, and Structures ........ 52 
Сепега!...................... 52 
Installation ................... 52 
Building Sewer and Drainage 

PIPING азаа экшн eee 52 
Corrosion, Erosion, and 

Mechanical Damage ............ 52 
Protectively Coated Pipe ........ 52 
Freezing Protection ............ 52 
Fire-Resistant Construction ...... 52 
Waterproofing of Openings ...... 52 
Steel Nail Plates ............... 52 
Sleeves... '(მშეუშ"')"' 52 
Structural Members ............ 53 
Rodentproofing ................ 53 
Hangers, Supports, and Anchors . . .53 
Сепега!...................... 53 
Маїепа!...................... 5З 
Suspended Piping ............. 53 
Alignment зу» ла куе Мы ы 5З 
Underground Installation ........ 53 
Hanger Rod Sizes ............. 53 
Hanger Rod Sizes ............. 53 
Gas Piping ................... 53 
Trenching, Excavation, and 
Васка scat tat $Y eae 53 
Trenches ..................... 53 
Tunneling and Driving .......... 53 
Open Trenches ................ 53 
Excavations .................. 53 
Joints and Connections ......... 54 
Unions «echoes ee een ышы 54 
Prohibited Joints and 

Connections .................. 54 
Increasers and Reducers ........ 54 
General ce ას" 54 
Food-Handling Establishments . . . .54 
General i edas cia sata xed oes 54 
Test Саиде$.................. 54 
General: ...................... 54 


Pressure Tests (10 psi ог less) .. .54 


Pressure Tests (greater than 
10 psi їо 100 psi) .............. 54 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


318.4 


318.5 
319.0 


319.1 
320.0 
320.1 
321.0 
322.0 
323.0 
Table 313.3 


CHAPTER 4 


401.0 
401.1 
401.2 
401.3 


402.0 
402.1 
402.2 
402.3 
402.4 
402.5 
402.6 
402.7 
402.8 
402.9 


402.10 
402.11 
403.0 
403.1 
403.2 


403.3 
404.0 
404.1 
404.2 
405.0 
405.1 
405.2 
405.3 
406.0 
406.1 
406.2 
406.3 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pressure Tests (exceeding 


100 рѕї) ...................... 54 
Pressure Range ............... 54 
Medical Gas and Vacuum 

Systems ..................... 54 
C-.--””'"''''Mს" 54 
Rehabilitation of Piping Systems . .54 
General... Livres 54 
Essential Plumbing Provisions . . . .54 
Psychiatric Services ............ 54 


Plumbing Equipment Schedules . . .55 
Hangers and Supports .......... 55 


PLUMBING FIXTURES 


AND FIXTURE FITTINGS ....... 57 
General... 2 ie ide 59 
Applicability ................... 59 
Quality of Fixtures ............. 59 
Water-Conserving Fixtures 

and ЕЇпд95................... 59 
Installation ................... 59 
Cleaning ..................... 59 
JOINS wets carta 59 
Securing Fixtures .............. 59 
Wall-Hung Fixtures ............. 59 
Setting а ра puse 59 
Flanged Fixture Connections ..... 59 
Supply Fittings ................ 60 
Installation ................... 60 
Design and Installation of 

Plumbing Fixtures .............. 60 
Slip Joint Connections .......... 60 
Future Fixtures ................ 60 
Accessible Plumbing Facilities .. . .60 
C-. .-VV,'' 60 
Fixtures and Fixture Fittings 

for Persons with Disabilities ...... 60 
Exposed Pipes and Surfaces ..... 60 
Waste Fittings and Overflows ..... 60 
Waste Fittings ................. 60 
Overflows .................... 60 
Prohibited Fixtures ............. 60 
Prohibited Water Closets ........ 60 
Prohibited Urinals .............. 60 
Miscellaneous Fixtures .......... 60 


Special Fixtures and Specialties ...61 
Water and Waste Connections . . . .61 


Special Use Sinks ............. 61 
Special Use Fixtures ........... 61 
xxix 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


406.4 
407.0 
407.1 
407.2 
407.3 


407.4 
407.5 
407.6 
408.0 
408.1 
408.2 
408.3 
408.4 


408.5 
408.6 
408.7 
408.8 


408.9 
408.10 
408.11 
409.0 


409.1 
409.2 
409.3 
409.4 


409.5 
409.6 
410.0 
410.1 
410.2 
410.3 


411.0 
411.1 
411.2 
411.3 
411.4 
412.0 
412.1 
412.2 
413.0 
413.1 


XXX 


Zinc Alloy Components ......... 61 
Lavatories .................... 61 
Application ................... 61 
Water Consumption ............ 61 


Limitation of Hot Water 
Temperature for Public 


Lavatories .................... 61 
Transient Public Lavatories ...... 61 
Waste Outlet.................. 61 
Overflow ..................... 61 
Showers ..................... 61 
Application ................... 61 
Tileable Shower Receptors ...... 61 
Water Consumption ............ 61 


Individual Shower and 
Tub-Shower Combination 


Control Valves ................ 62 
Waste Ошйеї.................. 62 
Finished Curb or Threshold ...... 62 
Shower Compartments .......... 62 
Lining for Showers and 

Receptors .................... 62 
Public Shower Floors ........... 63 
Location of Valves and Heads ..... 63 
Water Supply Riser ............ 63 
Bathtubs and Whirlpool 

Bathtubs ..................... 63 
Application ................... 63 
Waste Outlet.................. 63 
Overflow ..................... 63 


Limitation of Hot Water 
Temperature in Bathtubs 


and Whirlpool Bathtubs ......... 63 
Backflow Protection ............ 64 
Installation and Access .......... 64 
Bidets ”..'””''''' 64 
Application ................... 64 
Backflow Protection ............ 64 
Limitation of Water 

Temperature in Bidets .......... 64 
Water Closets ................. 64 
Application ................... 64 
Water Consumption ............ 64 
Water Closet Seats ............ 64 
Personal Hygiene Devices ....... 64 
ს  _“”“”თ"""'''' 64 
Application ................... 64 
Backflow Protection ............ 65 
Flushing Devices .............. 65 
Where Required ............... 65 


413.2 
413.3 
413.4 
413.5 
414.0 
414.1 
414.2 
414.3 
4144 
415.0 
415.1 
415.2 
415.3 
415.4 
416.0 


416.1 
416.2 
416.3 
416.4 
416.5 
417.0 
417.1 
417.2 


417.3 
417.4 


417.5 


417.6 
417.7 
417.8 
418.0 
418.1 
418.2 
418.3 
418.4 
418.5 
419.0 
419.1 
419.2 
419.3 
420.0 
420.1 
420.2 
420.3 


Flushometer Valves ............ 65 
Flush Tanks .................. 65 
Water Supply for Flush Tanks ....65 
Overflows in Flush Tanks ........ 65 
Dishwashing Machines .......... 65 
Application ................... 65 
Backflow Protection ............ 65 
Drainage Connection ........... 65 
Lead Content ................. 65 
Drinking Fountains ............. 65 
Application ................... 65 
Drinking Fountain Alternatives ....66 
Drainage Connection ........... 66 
Location i NAE ERES 66 
Emergency Eyewash and 

Shower Equipment ............. 66 
Application ................... 66 
Water Supply ................. 66 
Installation ................... 66 
LOCATION: iur ue toe EA nat 66 
Drain ааа FERMER 66 
Faucets and Fixture Fittings ...... 66 
Application ................... 66 
Deck Mounted Bath/Shower 

Valves «event exu 66 
Handheld Showers ............. 66 
Faucets and Fixture Fittings 

with Hose Connected Outlets ..... 66 
Separate Controls for Hot 

and Cold Water ............... 66 
Low-Pressure Water Dispenser ....66 


Head Shampoo Sink Faucets . .... 66 
Footbaths and Pedicure Baths . . . .66 


Floor Drains .................. 66 
Application ................... 66 
Straine idee demens 66 
Location of Floor Drains ......... 67 
Food Storage Areas ............ 67 
Floor Slope ................... 67 
Food Waste Disposers .......... 67 
Application ................... 67 
Drainage Connection ........... 67 
Water Supply ................. 67 
SINKS ze osea а EST 67 
Application ................... 67 
Water Consumption ............ 67 
Pre-Rinse Spray Valve .......... 67 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Table 420.3 


420.4 
421.0 
421.1 
421.2 
422.0 


422.1 
422.2 
422.3 


422.4 


422.5 
422.6 
422.7 
422.8 
422.9 
422.10 


422.11 


Table 422.1 
Table 4-1 


Table 4-2 


CHAPTER 5 
501.0 
501.1 
Table 501.1(1) 
501.2 


502.0 
502.1 
503.0 
503.1 
503.2 
504.0 
504.1 
Table 501.1(2) 
504.2 
504.3 
504.4 
504.5 
504.6 


504.7 


Commercial Pre-Rinse Spray 
Valve Maximum Flow Rate ....... 


Waste Outlet .................. 
Floor Sinks ................... 
Application ................... 
Strainers ..................... 


Minimum Number of 
Required Fixtures .............. 


Fixture Count ................. 
Separate Facilities ............. 


Fixture Requirements for 
Special Occupancies ........... 


Toilet Facilities Serving 
Employees and Customers ...... 


Toilet Facilities for Workers ...... 
Water Closet Compartment ...... 
Urinal Partitions ............... 
Cosmetology ................. 
Cosmetology Establishments ..... 


Commissaries Serving Mobile 
Food Preparation Units ......... 


Employee Lavatories in 
Food Establishments ........... 


Minimum Plumbing Facilities ..... 


Occupant Load Factor 
[BSC and DSA-SS] ............ 


Minimum Plumbing Facilities 
[OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] ......... 


WATER HEATERS ............ 
General soe oc. cee setae 
Applicability ................... 
Water Heaters ................ 


California Energy Code 
Water Heating System 
Requirements ................. 


ს ს ა.“ 
Сепега!...................... 
Inspection .................... 
Inspection of Chimneys or Vents . . 
Final Water Heater Inspection ... 
Water Heater Requirements ...... 
Location ..................... 
First Hour Rating .............. 
Ment. «eme beng ee ates 
Clearance .................... 
Pressure-Limiting Devices ....... 
Temperature-Limiting Devices .... 


Temperature, Pressure, and 
Vacuum Relief Devices ......... 


Lead Content ................. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


83 
83 


505.0 


505.1 
505.2 
505.3 
505.4 
506.0 


506.1 
506.2 
506.3 


506.4 
506.5 


506.6 
506.7 


506.8 
506.9 
507.0 


507.1 
507.2 
507.3 
507.4 
507.5 
507.6 


507.7 
507.8 


507.9 


507.10 


507.11 
507.12 
507.13 


507.14 


507.15 
507.16 
507.17 
507.18 
507.19 
507.20 


507.21 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Oil-Burning and Other Water 


Heaters 22 ove уе аага 84 
Water Heaters ................ 84 
Safety Devices ................ 84 
Oil-Fired Water Heaters ......... 84 
Indirect-Fired Water Heaters ..... 84 
Air for Combustion and 

Ventilation .................... 84 
თს. жез eek whe зоа 84 
Indoor Combustion Air .......... 85 
Indoor Opening Size and 

Location cs cennera nadaire ia 85 
Outdoor Combustion Air......... 85 
Combination Indoor and 

Outdoor Combustion Air ......... 87 
Engineered Installations ......... 87 
Mechanical Combustion Air 

Supply ....................... 87 
Louvers, Grilles, and Screens ....87 
Combustion Air Ducts........... 87 
Appliance and Equipment 

Installation Requirements ........ 88 
Dielectric Insulator ............. 88 
Seismic Provisions ............. 88 
Appliance Support ............. 88 
Ground Support ............... 88 
Drainage Pan ................. 88 
Added or Converted 

Equipment or Appliances ........ 88 
Type of Gas(es) ............... 88 


Safety Shutoff Devices for 
Unlisted LP-Gas Appliance 


Used Indoors ................. 89 
Use of Air or Oxygen Under 
PIESSUIE თ” вра 89 


Protection of Gas Appliances 
from Fumes or Gases other 


than Products of Combustion ..... 89 
Prócess Al... „ааа 89 
Flammable Vapors ............. 89 
Installation in Residential 

Garages ieee dene yee Paces 89 
Installation in Commercial 

Garages «viel. Dpi ey 89 
Installation in Aircraft Hangars ... .89 
Venting of Flue Gases .......... 89 
Extra Device or Attachment ...... 89 
Addition to Existing System ...... 89 


Avoiding Strain on Gas Piping .. . .89 
Gas Appliance Pressure 


Regulators ................... 89 

Bleed Lines for Diaphragm-Type 

Malves чес ыы Sede ERAI 89 
xxxi 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


507.22 Combination of Appliances 

and Equipment ................ 90 
507.23 Installation Instructions .......... 90 
507.24 Protection of Outdoor 

Appliances ................... 90 
507.25 Accessibility for Service ......... 90 
507.26 Clearance to Combustible 

Маїепа!5..................... 90 
508.0 Appliances on Roofs, їп Attics 

or Under-Floor Spaces .......... 90 
508.1 General ...................... 90 
508.2 Installation of Appliances 

on ROOTS თი" 90 
508.3 Appliances on Roofs ........... 90 
508.4 Appliances in Attics and 

Under-Floor Spaces ............ 91 
509.0 Venting of Appliances ........... 91 
509.1 ს” '”''"'|!ხსხს”" 91 
509.2 Connection to Venting Systems .. .91 
509.3 Minimum Safe Performance ...... 91 
509.4 Type of Venting System to 

სს-ს" 92 
Table 509.4 Type of Venting System 

tobe Used ................... 92 
509.5 Masonry, Metal, and 

Factory-Built Chimneys ......... 93 
509.6 Gas Vents .................... 94 
Табе 509.6.1 Roof Slope Heights ............ 95 
509.7 Single-Wall Metal Pipe .......... 97 
Table 509.7.3.4(1) Clearances for Connectors ....... 97 
Table 509.7.3.4(2) Reduction of Clearances with 

Specified Forms of Protection ....99 
509.8 Through-the-Wall Vent 

Termination .................. 100 
509.9 Condensation Drain ........... 100 
509.10 Vent Connectors for 

Category | Appliances ......... 100 
Table 509.8.1 Through-the-Wall Direct-Vent 

Termination Clearances ........ 101 
Table 509.10.1.3 Minimum Thickness for 

Galvanized Steel Vent 

Connectors for Low-Heat 

Appliances .................. 102 
Table 509.10.1.4 Minimum Thickness for Steel 

Vent Connectors for 

Medium-Heat Appliances ....... 102 
509.11 Vent Connectors for 

Category II, Category III, and 

Category IV Appliances ........ 104 
509.12 Appliances Requiring Draft 

Hoods: «i eh DRIED os 104 
509.13 Manually Operated Dampers ....104 


xxxii 


509.14 


509.15 
510.0 


510.1 
510.2 
Table 510.2.1 


Table 510.1.2(1) 
Table 510.1.2(2) 
Table 510.1.2(3) 
Table 510.1.2(4) 
Table 510.1.2(5) 


Table 510.1.2(6) 
Table 510.2(1) 
Table 510.2(2) 
Table 510.2(3) 
Table 510.2(4) 
Table 510.2(5) 


Table 510.2 
Table 510.2 
Table 510.2 
Table 510.2 


6 
7 
8 
9 


Жы. OE Ed 


) 
) 
) 
) 


CHAPTER 6 


601.0 
601.1 
601.2 
601.3 


Table 601.3.2 


601.4 


601.5 


601.6 


601.7 
601.8 


602.0 
602.1 
602.2 
602.3 


Automatically Operated 


Vent Dampers ................ 104 
Obstructions ................. 104 
Sizing of Category | Venting 

Systems .................... 104 
Additional Requirements to 

Single Appliance Vent ......... 104 
Additional Requirements to 
Multiple-Appliance Vent ......... 106 


Vent Connector Maximum 
”ას”"" EE ERR 106 


Type B Double-Wall Gas Vent .. .110 
Type B Double-Wall Gas Vent .. .113 
Masonry Chimney............. 115 
Masonry Chimney............. 117 


Single-Wall Metal Pipe or 
Type B Asbestos-Cement Vent ...119 


Exterior Masonry Chimney ...... 120 
Type B Double-Wall Vent ....... 121 
Type B Double-Wall Vent ....... 125 
Masonry Chimney............. 127 
Masonry Chimney............. 129 


Single-Wall Metal Pipe or 
Type B Asbestos-Cement Vent . .131 


Exterior Masonry Chimney ...... 131 
Exterior Masonry Chimney ...... 132 
Exterior Masonry Chimney ...... 133 
Exterior Masonry Chimney ...... 134 


WATER SUPPLY AND 


DISTRIBUTION .............. 135 
Сепега!..................... 137 
Applicability .................. 137 
Water Supply and Flushing ..... 137 
Identification of a Potable and 
Nonpotable Water System ...... 137 
Minimum Length of Color 

Field and Size of Letters ....... 138 


Schools of Cosmetology and 
Cosmetological Establishments . .138 


Meat and Poultry Processing 


Plants s ek os ibus 138 
Collection Centers and 

Facilities .................... 139 
Renderers...—.: 2s: ida 139 
Horse Meat and Pet Food 
Establishments ............... 139 
Unlawful Connections .......... 139 
Prohibited Installation .......... 139 
Cross-Contamination .......... 139 
Backflow Prevention ........... 139 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


602.4 
603.0 
603.1 
603.2 


603.3 


603.4 
603.5 
Table 603.2 


Table 603.3.1 


604.0 
604.1 
604.2 
604.3 
604.4 


604.5 
604.6 
604.7 
604.8 


604.9 
604.10 
Table 604.1 


604.11 
604.12 
604.13 
605.0 
605.1 


605.2 
605.3 


605.4 
605.5 


605.6 


605.7 


605.8 
605.9 
605.10 


605.11 


Approval by Authority .......... 139 
Cross-Connection Control ...... 139 
General ..................... 139 
Approval of Devices ог 

Assemblies .................. 139 
Backflow Prevention Devices, 
Assemblies, and Methods ...... 140 
General Requirements ......... 140 
Specific Requirements ......... 141 
Backflow Prevention Devices, 
Assemblies, and Methods ...... 142 
Minimum Air Gaps for Water 
Distribution .................. 144 
Materials .................... 146 
Pipe, Tube, and Fittings ........ 146 
Lead Content ................ 147 


Copper or Copper Alloy Tube ...147 
Hard-Drawn Copper or Copper 


Alloy Tubing ................. 147 
Flexible Connectors ........... 147 
Cast-lron Fittings ............. 147 
Malleable Iron Fittings ......... 147 
Previously Used Piping and 

Tubing сезмек seid se eee 147 
Epoxy Coating ............... 147 
Plastic Materials .............. 147 


Materials for Building Supply 
and Water Distribution Piping 


and Fittings .................. 148 
SOldet «rn Sr RE Oen 149 
Flexible Corrugated Connectors . .149 
Water Heater Connectors ....... 149 
Joints and Connections ........ 149 
Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe, 

Tubing, and Joints ............ 149 


CPVC Plastic Pipe and Joints ...150 
CPVC/AL/CPVC Plastic Pipe 


and Joints ................... 150 
Ductile Iron Pipe and Joints ..... 150 
Galvanized Steel Pipe and 

Joints: zc '”' CEN 151 
PE Plastic Pipe/Tubing and 

შიო ”"""'' 151 
PE-AL-PE Plastic Pipe/Tubing 

and Joints ................... 151 
PERT SUR ын ынсы г ыы se 151 


PEX Plastic Tubing and Joints ...151 
PEX-AL-PEX Plastic Tubing 


and Joints ................... 152 
Polypropylene (PP) Piping 
and Joints ................... 152 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


605.12 
605.13 
605.14 
605.15 
605.16 


606.0 
606.1 
606.2 
606.3 
606.4 
606.5 
606.6 
606.7 
606.9 
606.10 
607.0 
607.1 
607.2 
607.3 
607.4 
607.5 
607.6 
608.0 


608.1 
608.2 
608.3 


608.4 
608.5 
608.6 
608.7 
609.0 


609.1 
609.2 
609.3 
609.4 
609.5 
609.6 
609.7 
609.8 
609.9 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


PVC Plastic Pipe and Joints ..... 152 
Stainless Steel Pipe and Joints .. .152 
Slip Joints ................... 153 
Dielectric Unions.............. 153 
Joints Between Various 

Materials .................... 153 
Valves ...................... 153 
Сепега!..................... 153 
Fullway Valve ................ 153 
Multidwelling Units ............ 153 
Multiple Openings ............. 153 
Control Valve ................ 153 
Accessible .................. 153 
Multiple Fixtures .............. 153 
Check Valve Required ......... 153 
Leak Detection Devices ........ 154 
Potable Water Supply Tanks ... .154 
General -“”“"'!!""""" 154 
Private Well Water Tanks ....... 154 
Potable Water Tanks .......... 154 
Venting ..................... 154 
Overflow .................... 154 
MalVes consi ead ETE ს!” 154 


Water Pressure, Pressure 
Regulators, Pressure Relief 
Valves, and Vacuum Relief 


Мае “ი” 154 
Inadequate Water Pressure ..... 154 
Excessive Water Pressure ...... 154 


Expansion Tanks, and 
Combination Temperature 


and Pressure-Relief Valves ..... 154 
Pressure Relief Valves ......... 154 
Discharge Piping ............. 154 
Water-Heating Devices......... 155 
Vacuum Relief Valves ......... 155 
Installation, Testing, Unions, 

and Location ................. 155 
Installation .................. 155 
Ттепсһе$.................... 155 
Under Concrete Slab .......... 155 
I “““”“”"”"'""' 155 
UNIONS წშ))""'”"' 155 
Location აია აივ eb REPRE 155 
Abutting Lot ................. 155 
PUMPS: i-i Re 155 


Low-Pressure Cutoff Required 
on Booster Pumps for Water 
Distribution Systems ........... 156 


xxxiii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


609.10 


609.11 
609.12 
610.0 
610.1 
610.2 
610.3 
610.4 


610.5 


610.6 
610.7 


610.8 


610.9 
610.10 
Table 610.10 


Table 610.3 


Table 610.4 


610.11 


610.12 
610.13 
611.0 


611.1 
611.2 
611.3 
611.4 
612.0 


612.1 
Table 611.1 


Table 611.4 


613.0 


Table 613.1 


614.0 


615.0 


xxxiv 


Disinfection of Potable Water 
System «x ssl uu 


Water Hammer ............... 
Pipe Insulation ............... 
Size of Potable Water Piping .... 


Pressure 085 ................ 
Quantity of Water ............. 


Sizing Water Supply and 
Distribution Systems ........... 


Sizing per Appendices 
А, С, апа М ................. 


Friction and Pressure Loss ...... 


Conditions for Using 
Table 610.4.................. 


Size of Meter and Building 
Supply Pipe Using Table 610.4 .. 


Size of Branches 
Sizing for Flushometer Valves ... 


Flushometer Fixture Units 
for Water Sizing Using 
Table 610.3.................. 


Water Supply Fixture Units 
(WSFU) and Minimum Fixture 
Branch Pipe Sizes ............ 


Fixture Unit Table for 
Determining Water Pipe 
and Meter Sizes .............. 


Sizing Systems for 
Flushometer Tanks ............ 


Sizing for Velocity ............. 
Exceptions .................. 


Drinking Water Treatment 
შეი “””''"!' 


Application 
Air Gap Discharge ............ 
Connection Tubing ............ 
Sizing of Residential Softeners ... 
Residential Fire Sprinkler 
Systems .................... 
Installation 
Drinking Water Treatment 

Units: eee ee oe: 
Sizing of Residential Water 
Softeners 
Domestic Hot-Water Distribution 
Systems for Health Facilities 

and Clinics .................. 
Hot Water Use ................. 
Dialysis Water-Distribution 
Systems. cioe E 


Identification of Potable and 
Nonpotable Water Lines ......... 


615.1 
616.0 


CHAPTER 7 
PART I 
701.0 
701.1 
701.2 
701.3 
701.4 
701.5 
701.6 
701.7 
Table 701.6 
Table 701.7 
702.0 
702.1 
Table 701.2 


Table 702.1 
Table 702.1(1) 


702.2 
Table 702.2 


702.3 
703.0 
703.1 
703.2 


703.3 
704.0 
704.1 
704.2 
704.3 
Table 703.2 


705.0 
705.1 


705.2 
705.3 


705.4 


705.5 


Uses Not Permitted ............. 162 
Emergency Water Supply........ 162 
SANITARY DRAINAGE ........ 163 
Drainage Systems ........... 165 
General ..................... 165 
Applicability .................. 165 
Drainage Piping .............. 165 
Drainage Fittings ............. 165 
Continuous Wastes ........... 165 
Lead. RA ЕЕ aad ged 165 
Caulking Ferrules ............. 165 
Soldering Bushings ............ 165 
Caulking Ferrules ............. 165 
Soldering Bushings ............ 165 
Fixture Unit Equivalents ........ 165 
Trap Size ................... 165 
Materials for Drain, Waste, 

Vent Pipe and Fittings ......... 166 
Drainage Fixture Unit 

Values (DFU) ................ 167 


Maximum Drainage Fixture 
Units for a Trap and Trap Arm .. .168 


Intermittent Flow .............. 168 
Discharge Capacity in 
Gallons Per Minute for 


Intermittent Flow Only ......... 168 
Continuous Flow.............. 168 
Size of Drainage Piping ........ 168 
Minimum Size ................ 168 
Maximum Number of Fixture 

სი·:დC”””""''''"' 168 
Sizing per Appendix C ......... 168 


Fixture Connections (Drainage) . .168 
Inlet Fittings ................. 168 
Single Vertical Drainage Pipe .. . .168 
Commercial Sinks ............. 168 


Maximum Unit Loading and 
Maximum Length of Drainage 


and Vent Piping .............. 169 
Joints and Connections ........ 169 
ABS and ABS Co-Extruded 

Plastic Pipe and Joints ......... 169 
Cast-Iron Pipe and Joints ....... 169 
Copper or Copper Alloy 

Pipe (DWV) and Joints ......... 170 
Galvanized Steel Pipe 

and Joints ................... 170 


Polyethylene (PE) Sewer Pipe . . .170 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


705.6 


705.7 
705.8 
705.9 
705.10 


706.0 


706.1 
706.2 
706.3 
706.4 
707.0 
707.1 
Table 707.1 
707.2 
Table 707.2 


707.3 
707.4 
707.5 
707.6 
707.7 
707.8 
707.9 
707.10 
707.11 
707.12 
707.13 
707.14 
708.0 


708.1 
709.0 
709.1 
710.0 


710.1 
710.2 
710.3 
710.4 
710.5 


710.6 
710.7 


PVC and PVC Co-Extruded 
Plastic Pipe and Joining 
Methods .................... 171 


Stainless Steel Pipe and Joints . . .171 
Vitrified Clay Pipe and Joints ....171 


Special Joints ................ 171 
Joints Between 

Various Materials ............. 171 
Changes in Direction of 

Drainage Flow ............... 172 
Approved Fittings ............. 172 
Horizontal to Vertical .......... 172 
Horizontal to Horizontal ........ 172 
Vertical to Horizontal .......... 172 
Cleanouts ................... 172 
PIJ encan osin aea 172 
Cleanouts ................... 172 
Approved ................... 172 
Cleanout Materials for Drain, 

Waste, and Vent.............. 172 
Watertight and Gastight ........ 172 
Госайоп .................... 172 
Cleaning .................... 173 
Extension ................... 173 
Interceptor .................. 173 
ACCESS dx ea ee ES 173 
Clearance ................... 173 
Fittings: «ub ates 173 
Pressure Drainage Systems ..... 173 
Countersunk Cleanout Plugs ....173 
Hubless Blind Plugs ........... 173 
Trap Arms ure XY ede К 173 
Grade of Horizontal Drainage 

PIPING: 3 etie а ens 173 
General REV 173 
Gravity Drainage Required ...... 173 
General ict ssl Ris 173 


Drainage of Fixtures Located 
Below the Next Upstream 
Manhole or Below the Main 


Sewer Level ................. 173 
Backflow Protection ........... 173 
Sewage Discharge ............ 173 
Sewage Ejector and Pumps ..... 173 
Discharge Line ............... 174 
Size of Building Drains and 

დ:სოელ“""' 174 
Backwater Valves ............. 174 


Drainage and Venting Systems . . .174 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


710.8 


710.9 
710.10 


710.11 
710.12 
710.13 


711.0 
711.1 
712.0 
712.1 
712.2 
712.3 
PART Il 
713.0 
713.1 
713.2 


713.3 
713.4 
713.5 
713.6 
713.7 
714.0 


714.1 
714.2 
714.3 
714.4 


714.5 
715.0 
715.1 
715.2 
715.3 
716.0 
716.1 
717.0 
717.1 
Table 717.1 


717.2 


718.0 


718.1 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Sump and Receiving Tank 


Construction ................. 174 
Аа ceeded t ye aN 174 
Sump and Receiving Tank 

Covers and Vents............. 174 
Air Tanks ................... 174 
Grinder Pump Ejector.......... 174 


Macerating Toilet Systems 
and Pumped Waste Systems ... .174 


Suds Relief .................. 175 
Әепегаі ..................... 175 
ს-'””''ო" 175 
Media. cuoc 175 
Water Test .................. 175 
Air ТӨБЕ tsi cleanse Soe eee eee 175 
Building Sewers ............. 175 
Sewer Required .............. 175 
Where Required .............. 175 
Private Sewage Disposal 

ა Iო''“ჩს”უწშ 175 
Public бемег................. 175 
Public Sewer Availability ....... 175 
Permit. sesso "ს 175 
о e rear Gan RES 175 
Installation .................. 175 


Damage to Public Sewer or 
Private Sewage Disposal 


ააა ასას .ნCნ-Cნს 175 
Unlawful Practices ............ 175 
Prohibited Water Discharge ..... 176 


Prohibited Sewer Connection . . . .176 
Commercial Food Waste 


Disposer .................... 176 
_ --CსCსს"”····· . 176 
Building Sewer Materials ....... 176 
Materials .................... 176 
Joining Methods and Materials . . .176 
Existing Sewers .............. 176 
Markings .................... 176 
Сепега!..................... 176 
Size of Building Sewers ........ 176 
Сепега!..................... 176 


Maximum/Minimum Fixture 
Unit Loading on Building 
Sewer Piping ................ 176 


Meat and Poultry Processing 
Plants: 1254s ix dbz vau nak ap: 176 


Grade, Support, and 
Protection of Building Sewers ...176 


Slope: de ER 176 


XXXV 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


718.2 
718.3 
719.0 
719.1 
719.2 
719.3 
719.4 
719.5 
719.6 
720.0 
720.1 
721.0 
721.1 
Table 721.1 


721.2 
722.0 


722.1 
722.2 


722.3 
722.4 
722.5 
723.0 
723.1 
724.0 


725.0 


726.0 


727.0 


CHAPTER 8 
801.0 
801.1 
801.2 
801.3 


801.4 
801.5 


801.6 
801.7 
802.0 
802.1 
803.0 
803.1 
803.2 


xxxvi 


ирро. альн аа 176 
Protection from Damage ....... 176 
Cleanouts ................... 177 
Locations ................... 177 
No Additional Cleanouts ........ 177 
Building Sewer Cleanouts ...... 177 
Cleaning .................... 177 
ACCESS i.e awa ciated Bias. 177 
Manholes ................... 177 
Sewer and Water Pipes ........ 177 
Generalne iud o гй ша» 177 
Location .................... 177 
Building Sewer ............... 177 


Minimum Horizontal Distance 
Required from Building Sewer . . . .177 


Abutting Lot ................. 177 
Abandoned Sewers and 

Sewage Disposal Facilities ...... 177 
Building (House) Sewer ........ 177 
Cesspools, Septic Tanks, 

and Seepage Pits ............. 178 
Filling 22 REIR ees 178 
Ownership .................. 178 
Disposal Facilities ............. 178 
Building Sewer Test ........... 178 
General ..................... 178 
Meat and Poultry Processing 

Plant Drainage ............... 178 
Collection Center and 

Facilities Drainage ............ 178 
Drainage and Plumbing, 

General ..................... 178 


Emergency Sanitary Drainage .. .178 


INDIRECT WASTES .......... 179 
General. лыы кылык Кымын 181 
Applicability .................. 181 


Air Gap or Air Break Required . . .181 


Food and Beverage 
Handling Establishments ....... 181 


Bar and Fountain Sink Traps ....181 
Connections from Water 


Distribution System ............ 181 
Sterilizers ................... 181 
Drip or Drainage Outlets........ 181 
Approvals ................... 181 
Сепега!..................... 181 
Indirect Waste Piping .......... 181 
Materials .................... 181 
Copper and Copper Alloys ...... 181 


803.3 
804.0 
804.1 
805.0 


805.1 
806.0 
806.1 
807.0 
807.1 
807.2 
807.3 


808.0 
808.1 
809.0 
809.1 
810.0 


810.1 
Table 810.1 


810.2 


810.3 
810.4 
811.0 
811.1 
811.2 
811.3 
811.4 
811.5 
811.6 
811.7 
811.8 
812.0 
812.1 
813.0 
813.1 
814.0 
814.1 
814.2 
814.3 


Table 814.3 


814.4 
814.5 
814.6 


814.7 


Pipe Size and Length .......... 181 
Indirect Waste Receptors ....... 182 
Standpipe Receptors .......... 182 
Pressure Drainage 

Connections ................. 182 
Сепега!..................... 182 
Sterile Equipment ............. 182 
General ..................... 182 
Appliances .................. 182 
Non-Classed Apparatus ........ 182 


Undiluted Condensate Waste . . . .182 
Domestic Dishwashing 


Machine .................... 182 
Cooling Water................ 182 
General... ween ils 182 
Drinking Fountains ............ 182 
General ს  '  “ 182 
Steam and Hot Water Drainage 

Condensers and Sumps ........ 182 


High-Temperature Discharge ....182 
Pipe Connections in Blowoff 


Condensers and Sumps ........ 183 
Sumps, Condensers, and 

Intercepting Tanks ............ 183 
Cleaning .................... 183 
Strainers .................... 183 
Chemical Wastes ............. 183 
Pretreatment ................. 183 
Waste and Vent Pipes ......... 183 
Joining Materials.............. 183 
ACCESS! а uS pub 183 
Permanent Record ............ 183 
Chemical Vent ............... 183 
Discharge ................... 183 
Diluted Chemicals ............. 183 
Clear Water Wastes ........... 183 
Сепега!..................... 183 
Swimming Роо\5.............. 183 
Сепега!..................... 183 
Condensate Waste and Control . . .183 
Condensate Disposal .......... 183 
Condensate Control ........... 184 
Condensate Waste Pipe 

Material and Sizing ............ 184 
Minimum Condensate 

Pipe Size ................... 184 
Appliance Condensate Drains ...184 
Point of Discharge ............ 184 
Condensate Waste from 
Air-Conditioning Coils .......... 185 
Plastic Fittings ............... 185 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 9 
901.0 
901.1 
901.2 
901.3 
902.0 
902.1 
902.2 


903.0 
903.1 
903.2 


903.3 
904.0 
904.1 
904.2 
905.0 


905.1 
905.2 
905.3 
905.4 
905.5 
905.6 
906.0 
906.1 
906.2 
906.3 
906.4 
906.5 
906.6 
906.7 
907.0 
907.1 
907.2 
908.0 
908.1 
908.2 


909.0 


909.1 
910.0 


910.1 
910.2 
910.3 
910.4 


VENTS ა." 187 
Сепега!..................... 189 
Applicability .................. 189 
Vents Required............... 189 
Trap Seal Protection........... 189 
Vents Not Required ........... 189 
Interceptor .................. 189 
Bars, Soda Fountains, and 

Counter дг. ъа Et 189 
Materials .................... 189 
Applicable Standards .......... 189 
Use of Copper or Copper 

Alloy Tubing ................. 189 
Changes in Direction .......... 189 
Size of Vents ................ 189 
Ki mS 189 
Length... is beeing ee eed 189 
Vent Pipe Grades and 

Connections ................. 190 
Grades zs tec CR rg 190 
Horizontal Drainage Pipe ....... 190 
Vent Pipe Rise ............... 190 
Roof Termination ............. 190 
Location of Opening ........... 190 
Common Vertical Pipe ......... 190 
Vent Termination ............. 190 
Roof Termination ............. 190 
Clearance ................... 190 
Use of Roof ................. 190 
Outdoor Installations ........... 190 
JOINTS а  ”'""""'""' 190 
Lს”»ძ""""'''' 190 
Frost or Snow Closure ......... 190 
Vent Stacks and Relief Vents . . . .190 
Drainage Stack ............... 190 
Yoke Мепї................... 190 
Wet Venting ................. 190 
Vertical Wet Venting ........... 190 
Horizontal Wet Venting for a 
Bathroom Group .............. 191 
Special Venting for Island 

Fixtures. nene yea AES 191 
Сепега!..................... 191 
Combination Waste and Vent 
Systems .................... 191 
Where Permitted.............. 191 
Approval .................... 191 
Vent cose ширыу tes 191 
Connections and Size ......... 191 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


910.5 
910.6 
910.7 
911.0 
911.1 
911.2 


911.3 
911.4 


911.5 
912.0 
912.1 
912.2 


CHAPTER 10 


1001.0 
1001.1 
1001.2 
1002.0 
1002.1 
1002.2 
1002.3 
1002.4 
1003.0 
1003.1 
Table 1002.2 


1003.2 
1003.3 
1004.0 
1004.1 
1004.2 
1005.0 
1005.1 
1006.0 
1006.1 
1007.0 
1007.1 
1007.2 
1008.0 
1008.1 
1009.0 


1009.1 
Table 1009.1 
1009.2 
1009.3 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Vertical Waste Pipe ........... 191 
Cleanouts ................... 191 
Fixtüres а.а ара ғ 191 
Circuit Venting ............... 191 
Circuit Vent Permitted ......... 191 
Circuit Vent Size and 
Connection .................. 192 
Relief Vent .................. 192 
Slope and Size of Horizontal 
Branch “||! 192 
Additional Fixtures ............ 192 
Engineered Vent System ....... 192 
Сепега!..................... 192 
Minimum Requirements ........ 192 
TRAPS AND 
INTERCEPTORS ............. 193 
Сепега!..................... 195 
Applicability .................. 195 
Where Required .............. 195 
Traps Protected by Vent Pipes . .195 
Vent Pipes .................. 195 
Fixture Traps ................ 195 
Change of Direction ........... 195 
Vent Pipe Opening ............ 195 
Traps - Described ............ 195 
General Requirements ......... 195 
Horizontal Lengths of Trap 
ТР ОРНА а ОЕ Е 195 
Slip Joint Fittings ............. 195 
Эе ао ала 195 
TADS """"''" 196 
Prohibited ................... 196 
Movable Parts ................ 196 
Trap Seals .................. 196 
Сепега!..................... 196 
Floor Drain Traps ............. 196 
Сепега!..................... 196 
Trap Seal Protection........... 196 
Сепега!..................... 196 
Trap Seal Primers ............ 196 
Building Traps................ 196 
Сепега!..................... 196 
Interceptors (Clarifiers) and 
Separators .................. 196 
Where Required .............. 196 
Approved Interceptors (Clarifiers) . .196 
Approval .................... 196 
სსს.“ " 196 
XXXVII 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


1009.4 
1009.5 
1009.6 
1009.7 
1010.0 


1010.1 
1010.2 


1010.3 


1010.4 


1010.5 
1011.0 


1011.1 
1012.0 


1012.1 
1013.0 
1013.1 
1014.0 
1014.1 
1014.2 


Table 1014.2.1 


1014.3 
Table 1014.3.6 


1015.0 


1015.1 
1015.2 


1015.3 
1015.4 
1016.0 
1016.1 
1016.2 
1016.3 
1016.4 
1017.0 


1017.1 
1017.2 
1017.3 
1017.4 


xxxviii 


Relief Vent .................. 196 
Location .................... 196 
Maintenance of Interceptors .... . 196 
Discharge ................... 196 


Slaughterhouses, Packing 


Establishments, etc ........... 196 
Сепега!..................... 196 
Meat and Poultry Processing 

Plants პასს” 197 
Collection Centers and 

Facililies ....2:2 ilia 197 
Horse Meat and Pet Food 
Establishments ............... 197 
Draining and Plumbing ........ 197 
Minimum Requirements for 

Auto Wash Racks ............. 197 
Сепега!..................... 197 
Commercial and Industrial 

Laundries ................... 197 
General ოა... . 197 
Bottling Establishments ........ 197 
General ыш ene ek 197 
Grease Interceptors ........... 197 
General ..................... 197 
Hydromechanical Grease 

Interceptors .................. 198 
Hydromechanical Grease 

Interceptor Sizing Using 

Gravity Flow Rates ............ 198 
Gravity Grease Interceptors ..... 198 
Gravity Grease Interceptor 

SIZING hits eaten Aa ea e ი 199 
FOG (Fats, Oils, and Greases) 
Disposal System .............. 199 
ყა... “”'''" 199 
Components, Materials, and 
Equipment .................. 200 
Sizing and Installation ......... 200 
Performance ................. 200 
Sand Interceptors ............. 200 
Discharge ................... 200 
Authority Having Jurisdiction ....200 
Construction and Size ......... 200 
Separate Use ................ 200 
Oil and Flammable Liquid 

Interceptors .................. 200 
Interceptors Required .......... 200 


Interceptor Design Alternatives ...200 
Interceptor Details 
Design of Interceptors ......... 200 


CHAPTER 11 
1101.0 
1101.1 
1101.2 
1101.3 


1101.4 
Table 1101.4.6 


1101.5 
1101.6 
1101.7 
1101.8 
1101.9 
1101.10 


1101.11 
1101.12 
1101.13 
1101.14 
1101.15 


1101.16 


1102.0 
1102.1 
1102.2 
1102.3 
1103.0 


1103.1 


1103.2 


1103.3 
1103.4 


Table 1103.1 


1104.0 
1104.1 
1105.0 


1105.1 
Table 1105.1(1) 


Table 1105.1(2) 


STORM DRAINAGE .......... 203 
თს...” ""“' 205 
Applicability .................. 205 
Where Required .............. 205 
Storm Water Drainage to 

Sanitary Sewer Prohibited ...... 205 
Material Uses ................ 205 
Materials for Subsoil Drainpipe 

and Fittings .................. 205 
Expansion Joints Required . ..... 205 
Subsoil Drains ............... 205 
Building Subdrains ............ 206 
Areaway Drains .............. 206 
Window Areaway Drains ....... 206 
Filling Stations and Motor 

Vehicle Washing 

Establishments ............... 206 
Paved Areas ................. 206 
Roof Drainage ............... 206 
Cleanouts ................... 207 
Rainwater Sumps ............. 207 
Traps on Storm Drains and 

Leaders ..................... 207 
Leaders, Conductors, and 
Connections ................. 207 
Roof Drains.................. 207 
Applications ................. 207 
Dome Strainers Required ....... 207 
Roof Drain Flashings .......... 207 
Size of Leaders, Conductors, 

and Storm Drains ............. 207 
Vertical Conductors and 

---:-ა””შ n a 207 
Size of Horizontal Storm 

Drains and Sewers ............ 207 
Size of Roof Gutters ........... 207 
Side Walls Draining 

onto a 800 .................. 207 


Sizing Roof Drains, Leaders, 
and Vertical Rainwater Piping ...208 


Values for Continuous Flow ..... 208 
General ..................... 208 
Controlled-Flow Roof 

Drainage .................... 208 
Application .................. 208 
Controlled-Flow Maximum 

Roof Water Depth............. 209 
Distance of Scupper Bottoms 

Above Roof .................. 209 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1105.2 
1106.0 


1106.1 
1106.2 


1106.3 
1107.0 
1107.1 
1107.2 


Table 1103.2 


Table 1103.3 


CHAPTER 12 
1201.0 
1201.1 
1202.0 
1202.1 
1202.2 
1202.3 
1203.0 
1203.1 
1203.2 
1203.3 
1203.4 
1204.0 
1204.1 
1204.2 
1204.3 
1205.0 


1205.1 
1205.2 
1206.0 
1206.1 
1206.2 
1206.3 
1207.0 
1207.1 
1208.0 


1208.1 
1208.2 


1208.3 
Table 1208.3.1 


Setback Roofs ............... 209 
Engineered Storm Drainage 

System иык кект кек eed 209 
Сепега!..................... 209 
Siphonic Roof Drainage 

Systems .................... 209 
Siphonic Roof Drains .......... 209 
Testing; -ას”""'"""' 209 
Testing Required ............. 209 
Methods of Testing Storm 

Drainage Systems ............ 209 
Sizing of Horizontal 

Rainwater Piping ............. 210 
Size of Gutters ............... 211 
FUEL GAS PIPING ........... 213 
General ..................... 215 
Applicability .................. 215 
Coverage of Piping System ..... 215 
Сепега!..................... 215 
Piping System Requirements ....215 
Applications ................. 215 
Inspection ................... 215 
Inspection Notification ......... 215 
Excavation .................. 215 
Type of Inspections ........... 215 
Inspection Waived ............ 216 
Certificate of Inspection ........ 216 
Issuance .................... 216 
Gas Supplier................. 216 
Unlawful .................... 216 
Authority to Render Gas 

Semice а ааа x eq ით 216 
Authorized Personnel .......... 216 
Outlets: 12 olov ee evi 216 
Authority to Disconnect ........ 216 
Disconnection ................ 216 
სასა“ ” eaa 216 
Capped Outlets............... 216 
Temporary Use of Gas ......... 216 
Сепега!..................... 216 
Gas Piping System Design, 

Materials, and Components ..... 216 


Installation of Piping System ....216 
Interconnections Supplying 


Separate Users............... 216 
Sizing of Gas Piping Systems ...216 
Approximate Gas Input for 

Typical Appliances ............ 217 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1208.4 


1208.5 


Table 1208.5.8.2 


1208.6 
1208.7 
1208.8 


1208.9 


1208.10 


1208.11 
1208.12 
1208.13 
1208.14 
1208.15 


Table 1208.13 
1209.0 
1209.1 
1210.0 
1210.1 
1210.2 
1210.3 


Table 1210.3.5.1 
1210.4 

1210.5 

1210.6 

1210.7 

1210.8 

1210.9 

1210.10 
1210.11 


1210.12 


1211.0 


1211.1 


1211.2 
1211.3 
1211.4 
1211.5 
1211.6 
1211.7 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Maximum Operating Pressure 


in Buildings .................. 217 
Acceptable Piping Materials 

and Joining Methods .......... 217 
Specifications for Threading 

Metallic Pipe ................. 219 
Gas Meters .................. 220 
Gas Pressure Regulators ....... 221 
Overpressure Protection 

Required .................... 221 
Overpressure Protection 

Devices ..................... 221 
Pressure Limitation 

Requirements ................ 222 
Backpressure Protection ....... 222 
Low-Pressure Protection ....... 222 
Shutoff Valves ............... 222 
Expansion and Flexibility ....... 222 
Pressure Regulator and 

Pressure Control Venting ....... 222 
Manual Gas Valve Standards . . . 223 
Excess Flow Valve ............ 223 
C-.- -'””””"'''""! es 223 
Gas Piping Installation ......... 223 
Piping Underground ........... 223 
CSST Piping Systems ......... 225 
Installation of Aboveground 

PIPING © ..---”" Reto s 225 
Support of Piping ............. 225 
Concealed Piping in Buildings . . .225 
Piping in Vertical Chases ....... 226 
Gas Pipe Turns .............. 226 
Drips and Sediment Traps ...... 227 
Outlets: ама aed ets 227 
Manual Gas Shutoff Valves ..... 227 
Prohibited Devices ............ 227 


Systems Containing Gas-Air 
Mixtures Outside the 


Flammable Range ............ 227 
Systems Containing Flammable 
Gas-Air Mixtures .............. 227 
Electrical Bonding and 

Grounding ................... 229 
Pipe and Tubing Other than 

СТ. nates et Satins 229 


Bonding of CSST Gas Piping . . . .229 
Arc-Resistant Jacketed CSST ...229 


Prohibited Use ............... 229 
Lightning Protection System ..... 229 
Electrical Circuits ............. 229 
Electrical Connections ......... 229 

xxxix 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


1211.8 Earthquake-Actuated Gas 

Shutoff М\амез................ 
1212.0 Appliance and Equipment 

Connections to Building Piping ... 
1212.1 Connecting Appliances and 

Equipment .................. 
1212.2 Suspended Low-Intensity 

Infrared Tube Heaters ......... 
1212.3 Use of Nonmetallic Gas 

Hose Connectors ............. 
1212.4 Injection (Bunsen) Burners ...... 
1212.5 Connection of Portable 

and Mobile Industrial 

Gas Appliances .............. 
1212.6 Appliance Shutoff Valves 

and Connections .............. 
1212.7 Quick-Disconnect Devices ...... 
1212.8 Gas Convenience Outlets ...... 
1212.9 Sediment Trap ............... 
1212.10 Installation of Piping ........... 
1212.11 Liquefied Petroleum Gas 

Facilities and Piping ........... 
1213.0 Pressure Testing, Inspection, 

and Purging ................. 
1213.1 Piping Installations ............ 
1213.2 Test Preparation .............. 
1213.3 Test Pressure ................ 
1213.4 Detection of Leaks and Defects . . 
1213.5 Piping System Leak Test ....... 
1213.6 Purging Requirements ......... 
Table 1213.6.1 Size and Length of Piping ...... 
1214.0 Required Gas Supply .......... 
1214.1 Сепега!..................... 
1214.2 Моите ი” '”"””"' 
1214.3 Gas Appliances .............. 
1214.4 Size of Piping Outlets .......... 
1215.0 Required Gas Piping Size ...... 
1215.1 Pipe Sizing Methods ........... 
1215.2 Sizing of Gas Piping Systems ... 
1215.3 Sizing Equations .............. 
Table 1215.3 Cr and Y for Natural Gas 

and Undiluted Propane at 

Standard Conditions ........... 
1215.4 Sizing of Piping Sections ....... 
1215.5 Engineering Methods .......... 
1215.6 Variable Gas Pressure ......... 
Table 1215.2(1) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 
Table 1215.2(2) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 
Table 1215.2(3) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 
Table 1215.2(4) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 

xl 


Table 1215.2(5) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 241 
Table 1215.2(6) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 242 
Table 1215.2(7) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 243 
Table 1215.2(8) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 244 
Table 1215.2(9) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 245 
Table 1215.2(10) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 246 
Table 1215.2(11) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 247 
Table 1215.2(12) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 248 
Table 1215.2(13) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 249 
Table 1215.2(14) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 250 
Table 1215.2(15) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 251 
Table 1215.2(16) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 252 
Table 1215.2(17) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 253 
Table 1215.2(18) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 254 
Table 1215.2(19) Polyethylene Plastic Pipe ....... 255 
Table 1215.2(20) Polyethylene Plastic Pipe ....... 256 
Table 1215.2(21) Polyethylene Plastic Pipe ....... 257 
Table 1215.2(22) Polyethylene Plastic Tubing ..... 258 
Table 1215.2(23) Polyethylene Plastic Tubing ..... 258 
Table 1215.2(24) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 259 
Table 1215.2(25) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 260 
Table 1215.2(26) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 261 
Table 1215.2(27) Schedule 40 Metallic Pipe ...... 262 
Table 1215.2(28) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 263 
Table 1215.2(29) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 264 
Table 1215.2(30) Semi-Rigid Copper Tubing ...... 265 
Table 1215.2(31) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 266 
Table 1215.2(32) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 267 
Table 1215.2(33) Corrugated Stainless Steel 

Tubing (CSST) ............... 268 
Table 1215.2(34) Polyethylene Plastic Pipe ....... 269 
Table 1215.2(35) Polyethylene Plastic Pipe ....... 270 
Table 1215.2(36) Polyethylene Plastic Tubing ..... 271 

CHAPTER 13 HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND 

MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL 

VACUUM SYSTEMS .......... 273 
PARTI General Requirements ........ 275 
1301.0 General Requirements ......... 275 
1301.1 Applicability .................. 275 
1301.2 Where Not Applicable .......... 275 
1301.3 Conflict of Requirements ....... 275 
1301.4 Where Required .............. 275 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1301.5 
1302.0 
1302.1 
1302.2 
1302.3 
1302.4 
1303.0 
1303.1 


1303.2 
1303.3 
1303.4 


1303.5 
1303.6 
1303.7 
1303.8 
1303.9 


1304.0 


1304.1 
1304.2 
1304.3 
1304.4 
1304.5 
1305.0 
1305.1 
Table 1305.1 


1305.2 
1305.3 


1306.0 
1306.1 
1306.2 
1306.3 
1306.4 
Table 1305.2 
Table 1305.3 


PART II 


1307.0 
1307.1 
1307.2 


1307.3 


Existing Systems ............. 275 
Design Requirements .......... 275 
Risk Categories .............. 275 
Patient Care Spaces .......... 275 
Anesthesia .................. 275 
Wet Procedure Locations ....... 275 
Health Care Facilities .......... 275 
Drinking Fountain Control 

MalV6s icis tue E Rs 275 
Psychiatric Patient Rooms ...... 275 
Locations for Ice Storage ....... 276 
Sterilizers and Bedpan 

Steamers ................... 276 
Aspirators ................... 276 
ს უე–––_–"' 276 
Clinical Sinks ................ 276 
Water Supply for Hospitals ...... 276 
Work Performed in Occupied 
Healthcare Facilities ........... 276 
Medical Gas and Medical 

Vacuum Piping Systems ....... 276 
General ..................... 276 
Certification of Systems ........ 276 
Construction Documents ....... 276 
Extent of Work ............... 276 
Record. «ce ex RR. 276 
System Performance .......... 276 


Required Operating Pressures . . .276 


Standard Designation Colors 
and Operating Pressures for 


Gas and Vacuum Systems ...... 277 
Minimum Flow Rates .......... 277 
Minimum Station Outlets 

апа Inlets ................... 277 
System Certification ........... 277 
Certification .................. 277 
Certification Tests ............. 277 
Report Items ................. 277 
Components ................. 277 
Minimum Flow Rates .......... 277 
Minimum Outlets and Inlets 

Per Station .................. 278 
Category 1 Piped Gas and 

Vacuum Systems ............ 278 
Central Supply Systems ........ 278 
Terms s о a 278 
Nature of Hazards of Gas 

and Vacuum Systems ......... 278 


Permitted Locations for 
Medical Gases ............... 278 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1307.4 
1308.0 
1308.1 
1308.2 
1308.3 


1309.0 


1309.1 
1309.2 
1309.3 
1309.4 
1309.5 


1309.6 
1309.7 
1309.8 
1309.9 
1309.10 
1309.11 
1309.12 
1309.13 
1310.0 


1310.1 
1310.2 
1310.3 
1310.4 
1310.5 
1311.0 
1311.1 
1311.2 


1311.3 
1311.4 
1311.5 
1311.6 
1312.0 


1312.1 
1312.2 


1312.3 
1312.4 
1312.5 


1312.6 
1312.7 
1313.0 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Маїепа5.................... 278 
Pressure-Regulating Equipment . .278 
Where Required .............. 278 
Pressure Relief Valves ......... 278 
Pressure-Relief Valve 

Requirements ................ 279 
Oxygen Concentrator 

Supply Units ................. 279 
Oxygen Requirements ......... 279 
Particulate Size............... 279 
Suitability ................... 279 
Compatible Materials .......... 279 
Oxygen Concentrator 

Components ................. 279 
Supply Air Quality ............. 279 
Electrical Components ......... 279 
Vent Valve .................. 279 
Valved Sample Port ........... 279 
Suitable Filter ................ 279 
Check Valve ................. 279 
Outlet Valve ................. 279 


Oxygen Concentration Monitor . . .280 
Category 1 Medical Air 


Central Supply Systems ........ 280 
Quality of Medical Air .......... 280 
Uses of Medical Air ........... 280 
Medical Air Compressors ....... 280 
Medical Air Receivers .......... 280 
Valves ...................... 280 
Compressor Intake ............ 280 
Air Sources .................. 280 
Medical Air Compressor 
SOUIGe «iiu аан SEE 281 
Air Intakes ................... 281 
Location а з bx 281 
Separate Compressors ......... 281 
Screening ................... 281 
Medical Surgical Vacuum 
Central Supply Systems ........ 281 
General soiree eae ee" 281 
Medical-Surgical Vacuum 
აასს თა. “ე! 281 
Vacuum Receivers ............ 281 
Vacuum Filtration ............. 281 
Piping Arrangement and 
Redundancies ................ 282 
Piping Serviceability ........... 282 
Shutoff Valve ................ 282 
Medical-Surgical Vacuum 
5#4-ს-””":”!”!”!სსს)")!" 282 
XII 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


xlii 


1313.1 
1313.2 
1313.3 
1313.4 
1313.5 
1314.0 
1314.1 


1314.2 
1314.3 

1314.4 

1314.5 

Table 1314.5(1) 
Table 1314.5(2) 
1314.6 

1314.7 

1314.8 

1314.9 

1314.10 
1314.11 
1314.12 

1315.0 

1315.1 

1315.2 

1315.3 

1315.4 

1315.5 

1315.6 


1315.7 
1315.8 
1315.9 


1315.10 
1315.11 


1315.12 
1315.13 
1315.14 


1315.15 
1316.0 


1316.1 
1316.2 


1317.0 
1317.1 


Vacuum Source Exhausts ...... 282 
Location: ээй Елы аа 282 
Screening ................... 282 
Dips and Loops .............. 282 
Multiple Pumps ............... 282 
Valves... sued ere es 282 
Gas and Vacuum Shutoff 

Valves ...................... 282 
Security ..................... 282 
Labeled ..................... 282 
Accessibility ................. 282 
Valve Types ................. 282 
Positive Pressure Gases ....... 283 
Vacuum and WAGD ........... 283 
Source Valves ............... 283 
Main Line Valve .............. 283 
Riser Valves ................. 283 
Service Valves ............... 283 
Zone Valves ................. 283 
In-Line Shutoff Valves ......... 284 
Valves for Future Connections . . .284 
Station Outlets and Inlets ....... 284 
Сепега!..................... 284 
Required Valves .............. 284 
Secondary Valve ............. 284 
Identification ................. 284 
Threaded Outlets/Fittings ....... 284 
Gas-Specific Station 

Outlet/Inlet .................. 284 
Common Parts ............... 284 
Marking of Components ........ 284 
Components Not Specific 

to a Vacuum ................. 284 
Factory-Installed Copper 

Inlet Tubes .................. 284 
Factory-Installed Copper 

Outlet Tubes ................. 284 
Protection from Damage ....... 284 
Multiple Wall Outlets/Inlets ...... 284 
Nonstandard Operation 

Pressures ................... 284 
Post Installation .............. 284 
Pressure and Vacuum 

Indicator Locations ............ 284 
Isolation .................... 284 
Pressure and Vacuum 

Indicator Locations ............ 284 
Warning Systems ............. 285 
Category1 .................. 285 


1318.0 


1318.1 
1318.2 
1318.3 
1318.4 
1318.5 
1318.6 
1319.0 


1319.1 


1320.0 
1320.1 
1320.2 
1321.0 
1321.1 
1321.2 
1321.3 
1321.4 
1321.5 
1321.6 
1321.7 
1321.8 
1321.9 
1321.10 
1321.11 


1321.12 
1322.0 
1322.1 
1322.2 
1322.3 
1322.4 
1322.5 
1322.6 
1322.7 
1323.0 


1323.1 
Table 1323.1.5(1) 


Table 1323.1.5(2) 


1323.2 
Table 1323.1.4(1) 


Piping Materials for 
Field-Installed Positive Pressure 


Medical Gas Systems .......... 285 
Generali: ი” "'''''' 285 
Cleaning .................... 285 
Delivery ..................... 285 
Tubes for Medical Gas Systems . .285 
Manufacturer Markings ......... 285 
Documentation ............... 285 
Piping Materials for 

Field-Installed Medical-Surgical 
Vacuum Systems ............. 285 
Tubes for Medical Vacuum 

Systems .................... 285 
Joints and Connections ........ 286 
Сепега!..................... 286 
Changes in Direction .......... 286 
Brazed Joints ................ 286 
Brazed Joints and Fittings ...... 286 
Tube Joints .................. 286 
Filler Metals ................. 286 
Copper-to-Copper Joints ....... 286 
Accessible .................. 286 
სსა ·თ"''''"' 286 
Tube Ends .................. 286 
Cleaning Procedures .......... 286 
Brazing Dissimilar Metals ....... 287 
Nitrogen Purge ............... 287 
Assembling and Heating 

Brazed Joints ................ 287 
Inspection of Brazed Joints ..... 287 
Welded Joints ................ 288 
Welded Joints Procedure ....... 288 
Welding for Stainless Tube ..... 288 
Memory Metal Fittings ......... 288 
Axially Swaged Fittings ........ 288 
Threaded Fittings ............. 288 
Other Types of Fittings ......... 288 
Prohibited Joints .............. 288 
Installation of Piping and 

Equipment .................. 289 
Required Pipe Sizing .......... 289 


System Sizing — Flow 
Requirements for Station 
Outlets and Inlets ............. 289 


Maximum Permitted Pressure 
Loss In Medical Gas and 


Medical Vacuum Systems ....... 289 
Pipe Protection ............... 289 
Pressure Loss for Medical Air . . . . . 290 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Table 1323.1.4(2) 
Table 1323.1.4(3) 


Table 1323.1.4(4) 
Table 1323.1.4(5) 
Table 1323.1.4(6) 


1323.3 
1323.4 
Table 1323.4.4 


1323.5 
1323.6 
1323.7 


1323.8 
1323.9 
1323.10 
1323.11 


1323.12 
1323.13 


1323.14 
1323.15 
1324.0 


1324.1 
1324.2 
1324.3 
1324.4 
1324.5 


Table 1324.5.11 
PART III 


1325.0 


1325.1 
1325.2 


1325.3 
1325.4 


1325.5 
1325.6 


1325.7 
1325.8 


Pressure Loss for Nitrogen ....... 
Pressure Loss for Nitrous 

Oxide and Carbon Dioxide ....... 
Pressure Loss for Oxygen ....... 
Pressure Loss for Vacuum ....... 
Pressure Loss for Vacuum 
(Category 3) ................... 
Location of Piping ............. 
Pipe Support ................. 
Maximum Pipe Support 

Spacing ...................... 
Frost Protection .............. 
Connectors .................. 
Prohibited System 
Interconnections .............. 
Manufacturer's Instructions ..... 
Changes in System Use ........ 
Qualifications of Installers 


Qualification of Brazing 
Procedures and Brazing........ 
Breaching or Penetrating 

Medical Gas Piping ........... 
Labeling, Identification and 
Operating Pressure ........... 
Identification of Shutoff Valves ... 
Identification ................. 


Performance Criteria and 

Testing Category 1 (Gases, 
Medical Surgical Vacuum) ...... 
Where Required .............. 
Breached Systems ............ 
Test GaS: elei 
Initial Piping Blowdown......... 


Initial Pressure Tests— Medical 
Gas and Vacuum Systems ...... 


Gas Concentrations 


Category 2 Piped Gas and 
Vacuum Systems 


Category 2 Piped Gas and 
Vacuum Systems ............. 


Сепега!..................... 


Nature of Hazards of Gas 
and Vacuum Systems 


Central Supply Systems ........ 


Category 2 Medical Air 
Supply Systems 


Oxygen Concentrators ......... 


Category 2 Medical-Surgical 
Vacuum .................... 


Valves ...................... 
Station Outlets and Inlets ....... 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1325.9 


1325.10 
1325.11 
1325.12 
1325.13 
PART IV 


1326.0 


1326.1 
1326.2 


1326.3 
1326.4 


1326.5 
1326.6 
1326.7 


1326.8 
1326.9 
1326.10 
PART V 


1327.0 


1327.1 
1327.2 


1327.3 


1327.4 
1327.5 


Table 1327.5 


1327.6 


Table 1327.6 


1327.7 


1327.8 


CHAPTER 14 
1401.0 
1401.1 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Pressure and Vacuum 


Indicators ................... 299 
Warning Systems ............. 299 
Category 2 Distribution ......... 299 
Labeling and Identification ...... 299 


Performance Criteria and 
Testing — Gas, Medical-Surgical 
Vacuum, and WAGD ........... 299 


Category 3 Piped Gas and 


Vacuum Systems ............ 300 
Category 3 Piped Gas and 

Vacuum Systems ............. 300 
General == ისთ»! 300 
Nature of Hazards of Gas 

and Vacuum Systems ......... 300 


Medical Air Supply Systems ..... 300 
Medical-Surgical Vacuum 


Systems .................... 300 
Valves; og ul ev RE Exe 300 
Station Outlets and Inlets ....... 300 
Pressure and Vacuum 

Indicators ................... 300 
Warning Systems ............. 300 
Distribution .................. 300 
Labeling and Identification ...... 300 
Dental Gas and Vacuum 

Systems .................... 300 
Dental Gas and Vacuum 

Systems .................... 300 
General 2 ea ein edb eek 300 


Emergency Shutoff Valves 
(Oxygen and Nitrous Oxide) ..... 300 


Warning Systems (Oxygen 


and Nitrous Oxide) ............ 300 
Initial Pressure Test ........... 301 
Maximum Copper Tube 

Support Spacing .............. 301 
Maximum Copper Tube 

Support Spacing .............. 301 
Maximum Plastic Pipe 

Support Spacing .............. 301 
Maximum Plastic Pipe 

Support Spacing .............. 301 


Standing Pressure Tests for 
Oxygen and Nitrous Oxide 


PIPING: iex mee 301 

Verifier Operational 

Pressure Test ................ 302 

FIRESTOP PROTECTION ...... 303 

Сепега!..................... 305 

Applicability .................. 305 
xliii 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


1402.0 
1402.1 
1403.0 
1403.1 
1404.0 


1404.1 
1404.2 
1404.3 
1404.4 
1404.5 
1404.6 
1405.0 


1405.1 
1405.2 
1405.3 
1405.4 
1405.5 
1405.6 
1405.7 
1406.0 
1406.1 
1406.2 
1406.3 
1406.4 


CHAPTER 15 


1501.0 
1501.1 
1501.2 
1501.3 
1501.4 
1501.5 
1501.6 


1501.7 


Table 1501.5 


1501.8 
1501.9 
1501.10 
1502.0 
1502.1 
1502.2 


xliv 


Construction Documents ....... 305 
Penetrations ................. 305 
Installation .................. 305 
Materials .................... 305 
Combustible Piping 

Installations .................. 305 
General Requirements ......... 305 
Fire-Resistance Rating ......... 305 
Firestop Systems ............. 305 
Connections ................. 305 
Insulation and Coverings ....... 305 
Sleeves ..................... 305 
Noncombustible Piping 

Installations .................. 305 
General Requirements ......... 305 
Fire-Resistance Rating ......... 305 
Firestop Systems ............. 305 
Connections ................. 305 
Unshielded Couplings .......... 306 
$ееме$..................... 306 
Insulation and Coverings ....... 306 
Required Inspection ........... 306 
Gerieral რი” 306 
Examination ................. 306 
Penetrations ................. 306 
Field Installations ............. 306 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES 
FOR NONPOTABLE 


APPLICATIONS .............. 307 
C-ს. -''”” ”''""' 309 
Applicability .................. 309 
System Design ............... 309 
ყი“ See eel eet a ШЫ 309 
Component Identification ....... 309 
Maintenance and Inspection ... .309 
Operation and Maintenance 
_"-.!->>””'''"""" asi 309 
Minimum Water Quality 

Requirements ................ 309 


Recommended Minimum 
Alternate Water Source Testing, 
Inspection, and Maintenance 


Frequency ................... 310 
Material Compatibility .......... 310 
Signage .................... 310 
System Controls .............. 310 
Inspection and Testing ......... 310 
Сепега!..................... 310 
Supply System Inspection 

and Test: cx e AS 310 


1502.3 


1502.4 
1502.5 
1502.6 
1503.0 
1503.1 
1503.2 
1503.3 


1503.4 
1503.5 
1503.6 
Table 1503.4 
1503.7 
1503.8 


1503.9 


1504.0 


1504.1 
1504.2 


1504.3 


Table 1504.2 
1504.4 
1504.5 


Table 1504.5.3 


Table 1504.5.5 


1504.6 
1504.7 
1504.8 


1504.9 


1504.10 
1504.11 
1505.0 


1505.1 
1505.2 
1505.3 


Cross-Connection 


Inspection and Testing ......... 310 
Separation Requirements ....... 311 
Abandonment ................ 311 
SIZING) fh Feat whee oa pear ees Cole 312 
Gray Water Systems .......... 312 
Сепега!..................... 312 
System Requirements ......... 313 


Connections to Potable and 
Reclaimed (Recycled) Water 


Systems ..................... 313 
Location: si ERR ema 313 
Plot Plan Submission .......... 313 
Prohibited Location............ 313 
Location of Gray Water System . . .314 
Drawings and Specifications ....314 
Procedure for Estimating 

Gray Water Discharge ......... 314 
Gray Water System 

Components ................. 315 
Subsurface Irrigation 

System /опе$................ 316 
Сепега!..................... 316 


Required Area of Subsurface 
Irrigation Fields, Subsoil 
Irrigation Fields, and 


Mulch Basins ................ 316 
Determination of Maximum 
Absorption Capacity ........... 316 
Design of Six Typical Soils ...... 316 
Groundwater Level ............ 316 
Irrigation, Disposal Field and 

Mulch Basin Construction ...... 316 
Subsoil Irrigation Field 

Construction ................. 318 
Subsurface Irrigation Design 

Criteria for Six Typical Soils ..... 318 
Reserved ................... 318 
Reserved .....2 ll Rl 318 
Gray Water System Color 

and Marking Information ........ 318 
Other Collection and 

Distribution Systems ........... 318 
Testing. e ка ыз о Уаш: 318 
Maintenance ................. 318 
Recycled Water Supply 

Systems in Buildings .......... 318 
Сепега!..................... 318 
Рей л енор 319 
System Changes ............. 319 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1505.4 


1505.5 
1505.6 
1505.7 


1505.8 


1505.9 

1505.10 
1505.11 
1505.12 
1505.13 
1505.14 
1505.15 


1505.16 
Table 1505.16 


1506.0 


1506.1 
1506.2 
1506.3 
1506.4 


1506.5 
1506.6 
1506.7 


1506.8 


1506.9 


1506.10 
1506.11 
1506.12 
1506.13 


CHAPTER 16 


1601.0 
1601.1 
1601.2 
1601.3 


Connections to Potable or 
Recycled Water Supply 
Systems: «iles axes 1 


Water Pressure............... 
Initial Cross-Connection Test .... 


Recycled Water Supply 
System Materials ............. 


Recycled Water Supply 
System Color and Marking 
Information .................. 


Valys ...................... 
Hose Bibbs .................. 
Required Appurtenances ....... 
Pipe Separation in Trenches .... 
Signage 
Inspection and Testing ......... 
Minimum Water Quality 
Requirements for Reclaimed 
(Recycled) Water ............. 
Maintenance and Inspection .... 
Minimum Reclaimed 

(Recycled) Water Source 

Testing, Inspection, and 
Maintenance Frequency ....... 
On-Site Treated Nonpotable 

Gray Water Systems 
C-ს --=“”””""'"”""" 
Plumbing Plan Submission ...... 
System Changes 
Connections to Potable or 
Recycled Water Supply 

Systems .................... 
Water Pressure............... 
Initial Cross-Connection Test .... 
On-Site Treated Nonpotable 

Gray Water System Materials ... 
On-Site Treated Nonpotable 

Gray Water Devices and 

Systems .................... 
On-Site Treated Nonpotable 

Gray Water System Color and 
Marking Information ........... 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER 
CATCHMENT SYSTEMS ....... 


General... kei киш наз 
Applicability .................. 
System Design ............... 
“”ანხ""”„'"""ზ""'” nsei 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1601.4 
1601.5 
Table 1601.5 


1601.6 


1601.7 


1601.8 
1601.9 
1601.10 
1601.11 
1601.12 
1602.0 


1602.1 
1602.2 
1602.3 
1602.4 


1602.5 
1602.6 
1602.7 


1602.8 


1602.9 


1603.0 
1603.1 
1603.2 
1603.3 


1603.4 
1603.5 
1603.6 
1603.7 
1603.8 
Table 1603.4 
1603.9 
1603.10 
1603.11 
1603.12 
1603.13 
1603.14 
1603.15 


1603.16 
1603.17 
1603.18 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 


Component Identification ....... 
Maintenance and Inspection 


Minimum Alternate Water 
Source Testing, Inspection, 
and Maintenance Frequency ... 


Operation and Maintenance 
Manual ..................... 


Minimum Water Quality 
Requirements ................ 


Material Compatibility .......... 
System Controls .............. 
Separation Requirements ....... 
Abandonment ................ 
SIZING. 5s Boo ih hah Oe ache beh aed 


Nonpotable Rainwater 
Catchment Systems ........... 


C-.- -”““””""'"""!'"" 
Plumbing Plan Submission ..... . 
System Changes 


Connections to Potable 
or Reclaimed (Recycled) 
Water Systems ............... 


Initial Cross-Connection Test ... 
SIZING pp: 


Rainwater Catchment System 
Materials .................... 


Rainwater Catchment System 
Color and Marking Information . . 


Deactivation and Drainage for 
Cross-Connection Test......... 


Design and Installation ......... 
Rainwater Catchment Systems . . 
Outside Hose Bibbs ........... 


Rainwater Catchment 
Collection Surfaces ............ 


Minimum Water Quality 
Rainwater Storage Tanks ....... 
Location 
Above Grade 
Below Grade................. 
Minimum Water Quality 
Drainage and Overflow ......... 
Opening and Access Protection . . . 
Marking ..................... 
Storage Tank Venting.......... 
Pumps 
Roof Drains.................. 
Water Quality Devices and 

Equipment 
Freeze Protection ............. 
Debris Removal 
Required Filters 


27 


328 


328 
328 
328 
328 
328 
328 


328 
328 
328 
328 


328 


328 


328 


329 


329 


329 
329 


329 


329 


329 
329 
329 
329 
329 
329 
330 
330 
330 
330 
330 
330 
331 


331 
331 
331 
331 


xlv 


1603.19 Roof Gutters ................. 331 Appendix N Impact Of Water Temperature 


1603.20 Rainwater Diversion Valves ..... 331 On The Potential for Scalding 
1604.0 Signs 331 and Legionella Growth ......... 525 
EE Et iere seien თ «იაა, Appendix O Non-Sewered Sanitation 
1604.1 Сепега!..................... 331 Systems .................... 531 
1604.2 Commercial, Industrial, — Appendix P Professional Qualifications ...... 535 
Institutional and Residential . კ е 
Restroom Signs .............. 331 Appendix Q Indoor Horticultural Facilities ....539 
1604.3 Equipment Room Signs ........ 331 КОШЕ R Any Houses ................. 543 
1605.0 Inspection and Testing ......... 331 Appendice Onsite Stormwater Treatment 
Зуѕіетѕ .................... 547 
1605.1 General ..................... 331 
160512 Supply System Inspection USEFUL TABLES _........................... 553 
апа Теѕї .................... 331 
1605.3 Cross-Connection Inspection 
and Тезїпд.................. 331 INDEX.^. иара 563 
CHAPTER 17 REFERENCED STANDARDS ...333 HISTORY NOTE 
1701.0 СР РНИИ" 335 APPENDIX, г... 589 
1701.1 Standards ................... 335 
Table 1701.1 Referenced Standards ......... 335 
1701.2 Standards, Publications, 
Practices, and Guides ......... 352 
Table 1701.2 Standards, Publications, 
Practices, and Guides ......... 352 
APPENDICES TABLE OF CONTENTS ........ 363 
Appendix A Recommended Rules for 
Sizing the Water Supply 
აიიიწი' 365 
Appendix B Explanatory Notes on 
Combination Waste and Vent 
Systems .................... 381 
Appendix C Alternate Plumbing Systems ....385 
Appendix D Sizing Storm Water Drainage 
Systems .................... 395 
Appendix E Manufactured/Mobile Home 
Parks and Recreational 
Vehicle Parks ................ 405 
Appendix F Firefighter Breathing Air 
Replenishment Systems ........ 417 
Appendix G Sizing of Venting Systems ...... 423 
Appendix H Private Sewage Disposal 
Systems .................... 435 
Appendix | Installation Standards .......... 447 
Appendix J Combination of Indoor and 
Outdoor Combustion and 
Ventilation Opening Design ..... 487 
Appendix K Potable Rainwater 
Catchment Systems ........... 491 
Appendix L Sustainable Practices .......... 497 
Appendix M Peak Water Demand 
Calculator ................... 517 


xlvi 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


OSHPD 


Adopting Agency 


BSC 


BSC- HCD DSA 


CC 


SFM 


2 |1-AC 


AC 


SS | SS/CC 


1R 


2/3 


4 


BSCC 


DPH 


AGR 


DWR 


CEC 


CA 


SL 


SLC 


Adopt Entire Chapter 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


Division I — California 
Administration 


LE 


1.1.2 


14.3 


1.1.4 


1.1.5 


1.1.6 


1.1.7 


1.1.8 


“| жж ж 2 ж ж 


“| KKK 2 ж ж 


“| жж XX ж ж 


“| X 2 XX ж ж 


“| KKK 2 ж ж 


“| KKK 2 ж ж 


“| KKK) 2 ж ж 


“| KKK жж ж 


“| XX 2X ж ж ж 
“| жж ж ж ж ж 


“| X 2 ж ж ж ж 


“| KKK жж ж ж 


“| XX рер – € ж 


1.1.8.2 


1.1.9 


1.1.10 


1.1.11 


1.1.12 


“| KK 
“| же ж 
“| же ж 
“| же ж 


“| же ж 


“| же ж 
“| же ж 
“| же ж 
“| MX ж 
“| MX ж 
“| же ж 
“|жж же ж 


1.2.0 


“= жж ж 


1.3.0 


1.4.0 


1.5.0 


1.6.0 


1.7.0 


1.8.0 


1.9.0 


1.9.1 


1.9.1.1 


1.9.2 


1.9.2.1 


> 


1.9.2.1.1 


1.9.2.2 


1.9.2.2.1 


1.10.1 


1.10.2 


1.10.3 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION (continued) 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


Adopting Agency 


BSC 


BSC- 
CC 


SFM 


DSA 


OSHPD 


1 | 2 | 1-AC 


AC 


SS | SS/CC 


1R 


BSCC | DPH | AGR ОМ СЕС CA | SL |SLC 


Adopt Entire Chapter 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


1.10.4 


1.10.5 


1.10.6 


1.11.0 - 1.11.11 


1.13.0 


Division II - Scope and 
Administration 


101.0 


102.0 


X 
X 
x< 


>< 
(2 


103.0 


104.2 Items 1 & 2 


104.3.1 


104.4.3.1 


105.0 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 1 


ADMINISTRATION 
DIVISION I 
CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


1.1.0 General. 


1.1.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Califor- 
nia Plumbing Code, may be cited as such and will be referred 
to herein as "this code." The California Plumbing Code is 
Part 5 of thirteen parts of the official compilation and publi- 
cation of the adoption, amendment, and repeal of plumbing 
regulations to the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, 
also referred to as the California Building Standards Code. 
|| This part incorporates by adoption the 2024 Uniform Plumb- 
ing Code of the International Association of Plumbing and 
Mechanical Officials with necessary California amendments. 


1.1.2 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish the 
minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety 
and general welfare through structural strength, means of 
egress facilities, stability, access to persons with disabilities, 

sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation, and energy con- 

servation; safety to life and property from fire and other haz- 

ards attributed to the built environment; and to provide safety 
to fire fighters and emergency responders during emergency 
operations. 


1.1.3 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the 
construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replace- 
ment, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, main- 
tenance, removal, and demolition of every building or 
structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such 
buildings or structures throughout the State of California. 


1.1.3.1 Non-State-Regulated Buildings, Structures, and 
Applications. Except as modified by local ordinance pur- 
suant to Section 1.1.8, the following standards in the Cal- 
ifornia Code of Regulations, Title 24, Parts 2, 2.5, 3, 4, 
II 5, 6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 shall apply to all occupancies and 
applications not regulated by a state agency. 


1.1.3.2 State-Regulated Buildings, Structures, and 

Applications. The model code, state amendments to the 

model code, and/or state amendments where there are no 

relevant model code provisions shall apply to the fol- 
lowing buildings, structures, and applications regulated 
by state agencies as specified in Sections 1.2.0 through 

1.14.0, except where modified by local ordinance pur- 

suant to Section 1.1.8. When adopted by a state agency, 

the provisions of this code shall be enforced by the appro- 
priate enforcing agency, but only to the extent of author- 
ity granted to such agency by the state Legislature. 

Note: See "How to Distinguish Between Model Code 

Language and California Amendments " in the front of 

the code. 

l. State-owned buildings, including buildings con- 
structed by the Trustees of the California State Uni- 
versity, and to the extent permitted by California 
laws, buildings designed and constructed by the 
Regents of the University of California, and regu- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


10. 


12. 


lated by the Building Standards Commission. See 
Section 1.2.0 for additional scope provisions. 


Section 1.3.0 is reserved for the Board of State and 
Community Corrections. 


Section 1.4.0 is reserved for the Department of Con- 
sumer Affairs. 


Section 1.5.0 is reserved for the California Energy 
Commission. 


Section 1.6.0 is reserved for the Department of Food 
and Agriculture. 


Organized camps, laboratory animal quarters, pub- 
lic swimming pools, radiation protection, commis- 
saries serving mobile food preparation vehicles, and 
wild animal quarantine facilities regulated by the 
Department of Public Health. See Section 1.7.0 for 
additional scope provisions. 


Hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartments, 
dwellings, dormitories, condominiums, shelters for 
homeless persons, congregate residences, employee 
housing, factory-built housing, and other types of 
dwellings containing sleeping accommodations with 
or without common toilets or cooking facilities. See 
Section 1.8.2.1.1 for additional scope provisions. 


Accommodations for persons with disabilities in 
buildings containing newly constructed covered 
multifamily dwellings, new common use areas serv- 
ing existing covered multifamily dwellings, additions 
to existing buildings where the addition alone meets 
the definition of covered multifamily dwellings, and 
new common use areas serving new covered multi- 
family dwellings which are regulated by the Depart- 
ment of Housing and Community Development. See 
Section 1.8.2.1.2 for additional scope provisions. 


Permanent buildings and permanent accessory 
buildings or structures constructed within mobile- 
home parks and special occupancy parks regulated 
by the Department of Housing and Community 
Development. See Section 1.8.2.1.3 for additional 
scope provisions. 


Accommodations for persons with disabilities regu- 
lated by the Division of the State Architect. See Sec- 
tion 1.9.1 for additional scope provisions. 


. Public elementary and secondary schools, commu- 


nity college buildings, and state-owned or state- 
leased essential service buildings regulated by the 
Division of the State Architect. See Section 1.9.2 for 
additional scope provisions. 


Reserved for the State Historical Building Safety 
Board with the Division of the State Architect. 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


17. 


General acute care hospitals, acute psychiatric hos- 
pitals, skilled nursing and/or intermediate care facil- 
ities, clinics licensed by the Department of Public 
Health, and correctional treatment centers regulated 
by the Department of Health Care Access and Infor- 
mation/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and 
Development. See Section 1.10.0 for additional scope 
provisions. 


Applications regulated by the Office of State Fire 
Marshal include but are not limited to following in 
accordance with Section 1.11.0: 


1. Buildings or structures used or intended for use 
as an: 


1.1 Asylum, jail, prison. 


1.2 Mental hospital, hospital, home for the eld- 
erly, children’s nursery, children s home or 
institution, school or any similar occupancy of 
any capacity. 

1.3. Theater, dancehall, skating rink, audito- 
rium, assembly hall, meeting hall, nightclub, 
fair building, or similar place of assemblage 
where 50 or more persons may gather together 
in a building, room or structure for the purpose 
of amusement, entertainment, instruction, delib- 
eration, worship, drinking or dining, awaiting 
transportation, or education. 

1.4. Small family day care homes, large family 
day-care homes, residential facilities and resi- 
dential facilities for the elderly, residential care 
facilities. 

1.5. State institutions or other state-owned or 
state-occupied buildings. 


1.6. High rise structures. 

1.7. Motion picture production studios. 
1.8. Organized camps. 

1.9. Residential structures. 


2. Tents, awnings or other fabric enclosures used 
in connection with any occupancy. 


3. Fire alarm devices, equipment and systems in 
connection with any occupancy. 


4. Hazardous materials, flammable and com- 
bustible liquids. 


5. Public school automatic fire detection, alarm 
and sprinkler systems. 


6. Wildland-urban interface fire areas. 


Section 1.12.0 is reserved for public libraries con- 
structed and renovated using funds from the Cali- 
fornia Library Construction and Renovation Bond 
Act of 1988 and regulated by the State Librarian. 


Section 1.13.0 is reserved for the Department of 
Water Resources. 


For applications listed in Section 1.9.1 regulated by 
the Division of the State Architect — Access Compli- 
ance, outdoor environments and uses shall be clas- 
sified according to accessibility uses described in 
Chapter 11A, and 11B. 


18. Section 1.14.0 is reserved for Marine Oil Terminals 
regulated by the California State Lands Commission. 


1.1.4 Appendices. Provisions contained in the appendices of 
this code shall not apply unless specifically adopted by a state 
agency or adopted by a local enforcing agency in compliance 
with Health and Safety Code Section 18901 et seq. for Building 
Standards Law, Health and Safety Code Section 17950 for State 
Housing Law and Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7 for 
Fire Protection Districts. See Section 1.1.8 of this code. 


1.1.5 Referenced Codes. The codes, standards and publica- 
tions adopted and set forth in this code, including other codes, 
standards and publications referred to therein are, by title and 
date of publication, hereby adopted as standard reference 
documents of this code. When this code does not specifically 
cover any subject related to building design and construction, 
recognized architectural or engineering practices shall be 
employed. The National Fire Codes, standards, and the Fire 
Protection Handbook of the National Fire Protection Asso- 
ciation are permitted to be used as authoritative guides in 
determining recognized fire prevention engineering practices. 


1.1.6 Non-Building Standards, Orders, and Regulations. 
Requirements contained in the Uniform Plumbing Code, or in 
any other referenced standard, code or document, which are 
not building standards as defined in Health and Safety Code 
Section 18909 shall not be construed as part of the provisions 
of this code. For nonbuilding standards, orders, and regula- 
tions, see other titles of the California Code of Regulations. 


1.1.7 Order of Precedence and Use. 


1.1.7.1 Differences. In the event of any differences 
between these building standards and the standard ref- 
erence documents, the text of these building standards 
shall govern. 


1.1.7.2 Specific Provisions. Where a specific provision 
varies from a general provision, the specific provision 
shall apply. 


1.1.7.3 Conflicts. When the requirements of this code 
conflict with the requirements of any other part of the 
California Building Standards Code, Title 24, the most 
restrictive requirements shall prevail. 


1.1.7.3.1 Detached One- and  Two-Family 
Dwellings. Detached one- and two-family dwellings, 
lodging houses, live/work units, townhouses not 
more than three stories above grade plane in height 
with a separate means of egress, and their accessory 
structures, shall not be required to comply with the 
California Residential Code if constructed in accor- 
dance with the California Building Code. 


1.1.8 City, County, or City and County Amendments, Addi- 
tions or Deletions. The provisions of this code do not limit 
the authority of city, county, or city and county governments 
to establish more restrictive and reasonably necessary dif- 
ferences to the provisions contained in this code pursuant to 
complying with Section 1.1.8.1. The effective date of amend- 
ments, additions, or deletions to this code by city, county, or 
city and county filed pursuant to Section 1.1.8.1 shall be the 
date filed. However, in no case shall the amendments, addi- 
tions or deletions to this code be effective any sooner than the 
effective date of this code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Local modifications shall comply with Health and Safety 
Code Section 18941.5 for Building Standards Law, Health 
and Safety Code Section 17958 for State Housing Law or 
Health and Safety Code Section 13869.7 for Fire Protection 
Districts. 


1.1.8.1 Findings and Filings. 


1. The city, county, or city and county shall make 
express findings for each amendment, addition or 
deletion based upon climatic, topographical, or geo- 
logical conditions. 


Exception: Hazardous building ordinances and pro- 
grams mitigating unreinforced masonry buildings. 


2. The city, county, or city and county shall file the 
amendments, additions or deletions expressly 
marked and identified as to the applicable findings. 
Cities, counties, cities and counties, and fire depart- 
ments shall file the amendments, additions or dele- 
tions, and the findings with the California Building 
Standards Commission at 2525 Natomas Park 
Drive, Suite 130, Sacramento, CA 95833. 


3. Findings prepared by fire protection districts shall 
be ratified by the local city, county, or city and 
county and filed with the California Department of 
Housing and Community Development, Division of 
Codes and Standards, P.O. Box 278180, Sacra- 
mento, CA 95827-8180 or 9342 Tech Center Drive, 
Suite 500, Sacramento, CA 95826-2582. 


1.1.8.2 California Energy Code Requirements for 
Locally Adopted Energy Standards. In addition to the 
provisions of Section 1.1.8.1 of this part, local jurisdic- 
tions that adopt changes to energy conservation or insu- 
lation standards (including energy efficiency measures) 
may not enforce such changes until the California Energy 
Commission has made the findings required by Public 
Resources Code Section 25402.1(h)(2), following the 
process specified in Section 10-106 of the California 
Administrative Code. 


1.1.9 Effective Date of this Code. Only those standards 
approved by the California Building Standards Commission 
that are effective at the time an application for building per- 
mit is submitted shall apply to the plans and specifications 
for, and to the construction performed under, that permit. For 
the effective dates of the provisions contained in this code, 
see the History Note page of this code. 
Exceptions: 
(1) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Retroactive permits issued in accor- 
dance with Health and Safety Code Section 17958. 12. 
(2) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Plans approved by the Department 
of Housing and Community Development or a Depart- 
ment-approved design approval agency for factory-built 
housing as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 
19971. Approved plans, pursuant to the California Code 
of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Sub- 
chapter 1, Article 3, Section 3037 remain valid for a 
period of 36 months from the date of plan approval. 
1.1.10 Availability of Codes. At least one complete copy each 
of Titles 8, 19, 20, 24, and 25 with all revisions shall be main- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION 1 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


tained in the office of the building official responsible for the 
administration and enforcement of this code. Each state 
department concerned and each city, county, or city and 
county shall have an up-to-date copy of the code available 
for public inspection. See Health and Safety Code Section 
18942 (e)(1) and (2). 

1.1.11 Format. This part fundamentally adopts the Uniform 
Plumbing Code by reference on a chapter-by-chapter basis. 
When a specific chapter of the Uniform Plumbing Code is not 
printed in the code and is marked "Reserved", such chapter 
of the Uniform Plumbing Code is not adopted as a portion of 
this code. When a specific chapter of the Uniform Plumbing 
Code is marked "Not Adopted by the State of California" but 
appears in the code, it may be available for adoption by local 
ordinance. 


Note: Matrix Adoption Tables at the front of each chapter 
may aid the code user in determining which chapter or sec- 
tions within a chapter are applicable to buildings under the 
authority of a specific state agency, but they are not to be con- 
sidered regulatory. 


1.1.12 Validity. If any chapter, section, subsection, sentence, 
clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be 
unconstitutional, contrary to statute, exceeding the authority 
of the state as stipulated by statutes or otherwise inoperative, 
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining 
portion of this code. 


1.2.0 Building Standards Commission. 


1.2.1 BSC. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the 
specific authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this 
code, unless otherwise stated. 

l. State Buildings for All Occupancies. 


Application — State buildings (all occupancies), includ- 
ing buildings constructed by the Trustees of the Califor- 
nia State University (CSU) and the Regents of the 
University of California (UC) where no state agency has 
the authority to adopt building standards applicable to 
such buildings. 
Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 
18934.5. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 
2.5, commencing with Section 18901. 

2. University of California, California State Universities, 
and California Community Colleges. 


Application — Standards for lighting for parking lots and 
primary campus walkways at the University of Califor- 
nia, California State Universities, and California Com- 
munity Colleges. 

Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 

Authority Cited — Government Code Section 14617. 


Reference — Government Code Section 14617. 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


3. Existing State-Owned Buildings, including those 
owned by the University of California and by the Cali- 
fornia State University — Building seismic retrofit stan- 
dards including abating falling hazards of structural and 
nonstructural components and strengthening of building 
structures. See also Division of the State Architect. 


Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 


Authority Cited — Government Code Section 16600. 


References — Government Code Sections 16600 through 
16604. 


4. Unreinforced Masonry Bearing Wall Buildings. 


Application — Minimum seismic strengthening standards 
for buildings specified in the California Existing Build- 
ing Code, except for buildings subject to building stan- 
dards adopted pursuant to Part 1.5 (commencing with 
Section 17910). 


Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 
18934.7. 


Reference — Health and Safety Code Division 13, Part 
2.5 commencing with Sections 18901. 


1.2.1.1 State Building. For purposes of this code, a 
"state building” is a structure for which a state agency 
or state entity has authority to construct, alter, enlarge, 
replace, repair or demolish. 


1.2.1.2 Enforcement. [CSU, UC, Judicial Council and 
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilita- 
tion] state agencies or state entities authorized to con- 
struct state buildings may appoint a building official who 
is responsible to the agency for enforcement of the pro- 
visions of the California Building Standards Code. 


Exception: State buildings regulated by other sections 
of this code remain the enforcement responsibility of the 
designated entities. 


1.2.1.3 Enforcement, Reserved for DGS. 


1.2.1.4 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this sec- 
tion will be identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables 
under the acronym BSC. 


1.2.2 BSC-CG. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the 
specific authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this 
code, unless otherwise stated. 
1. Green Building Standards for Nonresidential Occu- 
pancies. 
Application — All occupancies where no other state 
agency has the authority to adopt green building stan- 
dards applicable to those occupancies. 
Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
18930.5, 18938 and 18940.5. 


Reference — Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 
2.5, commencing with Section 18901. 


2. Graywater Systems for Nonresidential Occupancies. 


Application — The construction, installation, and alter- 
ation of graywater systems for indoor and outdoor uses 
in nonresidential occupancies. 


Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
the applicable provisions of law. 


Authority Cited — Health & Safety Code Section 
18941.8. 


Reference — Health & Safety Code Section 18941.8. 


1.2.3 Alternate Materials, Design, and Methods of Con- 
struction and Equipment. The provisions of this code are not 
intended to prevent the installation of any material or to pro- 
hibit any design or method of construction not specifically 
prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative 
has been approved. An alternative material, design or method 
of construction shall be approved where the building official 
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies 
with the intent of the provisions of this code, and that the 
material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, 
at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in qual- 
ity, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and 
safety. 
1.2.3.1 Research Reports. Supporting data, where nec- 
essary to assist in the approval of materials or assem- 
blies not specifically provided for in this code, shall 
consist of valid research reports from approved sources. 


1.2.3.2 Tests. Whenever there is insufficient evidence of 
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence 
that a material or method does not conform to the 
requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate 
claims for alternative materials or methods, the building 
official shall have the authority to require tests as evi- 
dence of compliance to be made at no expense to the 
jurisdiction. Test methods shall be as specified in this 
code or by other recognized test standards. In the 
absence of recognized and accepted test methods, the 
building official shall approve the testing procedures. 
Tests shall be performed by an approved agency. Reports 
of such tests shall be retained by the building official for 
the period required for retention of public records. 


1.3.0 Board of State and Community Corrections. 


1.3.1 Specific scope of application of the agency responsible 
for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 

Application — Local detention facilities. 


Enforcing Agency — Board of State and Community Cor- 
rections. 

Authority Cited — Penal Code Section 6030; Welfare and 
Institutions Code Sections 210 and 885. 


References — Penal Code Section 6030; Welfare and 
Institutions Code Sections 210 and 885. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1.3.2 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of this 
code applicable to buildings identified in this section will be 
identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
BSCC. 


1.4.0 Department of Consumer Affairs. 
1.4.1 Specific scope of application of the agency responsible 
for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 

Board of Barbering and Cosmetology. 


Application — Any establishment or mobile unit where 
barbering, cosmetology, or electrolysis is being per- 
formed. 
Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by 
applicable provisions of law. 
Authority Cited — Business and Professions Code Sec- 
tion 7312. 
References — Business and Professions Code Sections 
7303, 7303.1, 7312, and 7313. 
1.4.2 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of this 
code applicable to buildings identified in this section will be 


identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
CA. 


1.5.0 Reserved for California Energy Commission. 


1.6.0 Department of Food and Agriculture. 


1.6.1 Specific scope of application of the agency responsible 
for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 
Application — Dairies and places of meat and poultry 
inspection. 
Enforcing Agency — Department of Food and Agricul- 
ture. 
Authority Cited — Food and Agricultural Code Sections 
18735, 18960, 19384, 33481, and 33731. 
References — Food and Agricultural Code Sections 
18735, 18960, 19384, 33481, and 33731. 
1.6.2 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of this 
code applicable to buildings identified in this section will be 


identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
AGR. 


1.7.0 Department of Public Health. 


1.7.1 Specific scope of application of the agency responsible 
for enforcement, the enforcement agency, and the specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 

Department of Public Health. 


Application — Commissaries serving mobile food prepa- 
ration units, food establishments, and organized camps. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Enforcing Agency — Department of Health Services and 
local health agency. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
18897.2, 110065, 113710, and 131200. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 18897.2, 
18897.4, 18897.7, 110065, 113705, 113710, and 131200. 


1.7.2 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of this 
code applicable to buildings identified in this section will be 
identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
DPH. 


1.8.0 Department of Housing and Community Development. 
[HCD] 

1.8.1 Purpose. The purpose of this code is to establish mini- 
mum requirements necessary to protect the health, safety, and 
general welfare of the occupants and the public by governing 
the erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, con- 
version, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, san- 
itation, ventilation, and maintenance or use of plumbing 
equipment or systems. 


1.8.2 Authority and Abbreviations. 


1.8.2.1 General. The Department of Housing and Com- 
munity Development is authorized by law to promulgate 
and adopt building standards and regulations for several 
types of building applications. The applications under 
the authority of the Department of Housing and Com- 
munity Development are listed in Sections 1.8.2.1.1 
through 1.8.2.1.3. 


1.8.2.1.1 Housing Construction. 


Application — Hotels, motels, lodging houses, apart- 
ments, dwellings, dormitories, condominiums, shel- 
ters for homeless persons, congregate residences, 
employee housing, factory built housing, and other 
types of dwellings containing sleeping accommoda- 
tions with or without common toilet or cooking facil- 
ities including accessory buildings, facilities, and 
uses thereto. Sections of this code which pertain to 
applications listed in this section are identified using 
the abbreviation “HCD 1”. 


Enforcing Agency — Local building department or 
the Department of Housing and Community Devel- 
opment. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
17040, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.5, 17921.6, 17921.10, 
17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17922.14, 17922.15, 
17926, 17927, 17928, 17958.12, 18938.3, 18944.11 
and 19990; and Government Code Section 12955. 1. 


References — Business and Professions Code Division 
5; Health and Safety Code Sections 17000 through 
17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200 through 
18700, 18860 through 18874, 18938.6, 18941, 
19890, 19891, 19892 and 19960 through 19997; 
Civil Code Sections 832, 1101.4, 1101.5, 1954.201, 
1954.202 and 5551; and Government Code Sections 
8698.4, 12955.1 and 12955.1.1. California Code of 
Regulations, Title 20, Sections 1605.1, 1605.3 and 
1607. 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


1.8.2.1.2 Housing Accessibility. 


Application — Covered multifamily dwellings as 
defined in Chapter 2 of the California Code of Reg- 
ulations, Title 24, Part 2, also known as the Cali- 
fornia Building Code including but not limited to 
lodging houses, dormitories, timeshares, condo- 
miniums, shelters for homeless persons, congregate 
residences, apartments, dwellings, employee hous- 
ing, factory-built housing, and other types of 
dwellings containing sleeping accommodations with 
or without common toilet or cooking facilities. 


Sections of this code identified by the abbrevi- 
ation “HCD 1-АС” require specific accommoda- 
tions for persons with disabilities, as defined in 
Chapter 2 of the California Building Code. The 
application of such provisions shall be in conjunc- 
tion with other requirements of this code and apply 
only to newly constructed covered multifamily 
dwellings as defined in Chapter 2 of the California 
Building Code. “HCD I-AC" applications include, 
but are not limited to, the following: 


1. All newly-constructed covered multifamily 
dwellings, as defined in Chapter 2 of the Cali- 
fornia Building Code. 


2. New common use areas, as defined in Chapter 
2 of the California Building Code serving exist- 
ing covered multifamily dwellings. 


3. Additions to existing buildings, where the addi- 
tion alone meets the definition of covered mul- 
tifamily dwellings, as defined in Chapter 2 of 
the California Building Code. 


4. New common use areas serving new covered 
multifamily dwellings. 


5. Where any portion of a buildings exterior is 
preserved, but the interior of the building is 
removed, including all structural portions of 
floors and ceilings, the building is considered a 
new building for determining the application of 
California Building Code, Chapter 114A. 


HCD I-AC building standards generally do not 
apply to public use areas or public accommodations 
such as hotels and motels, and public housing. Pub- 
lic use areas, public accommodations, and public 
housing, as defined in Chapter 2 of the California 
Building Code, are subject to the Division of the 
State Architect (DSA-AC) in Chapter 11B and are 
referenced in Section 1.9.1. 


Newly constructed | covered multifamily 
dwellings, which can also be defined as public hous- 
ing, shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 
11A and Chapter 11B. 


Enforcing Agency — Local building department or 
the Department of Housing and Community Devel- 
opment. 

Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
17040, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.5, 17921.6, 17921.10, 


17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17922.14, 17926, 17927, 
17928, 17958.12, 18938.3, 18944.11, and 19990; and 
Government Code Sections 12955.1 and 12955.1.1. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 17000 
through 17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200 
through 18700, 18860 through 18874, 18938.6, 
18941, and 19960 through 19997; Civil Code Sec- 
tions 1101.4, 1101.5, 1954.201 and 1954.202; and 
Government Code Sections 12955.1 and 12955. 1.1. 
California Code of Regulations, Title 20, Sections 
1605.1, 1605.3 and 1607. 


1.8.2.1.3 Permanent Buildings in Mobilehome 
Parks and Special Occupancy Parks. 


Application — Permanent buildings, and permanent 
accessory buildings or structures, constructed 
within mobilehome parks and special occupancy 
parks that are under the control and ownership of 
the park operator. Sections of this code which per- 
tain to applications listed in this section are identi- 
fied using the abbreviation "HCD 2". 


Enforcing Agency — The Department of Housing 
and Community Development, local building 
department or other local agency that has assumed 
responsibility for the enforcement of Health and 
Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, commencing 
with Section 18200 for mobilehome parks and 
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, com- 
mencing with Section 18860 for special occupancy 
parks. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
17040, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.5, 17921.6, 
17921.10, 17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17922.14, 
17922.15, 17926, 17927, 17928, 17958.12, 18552, 
18554, 18620, 18630, 18640, 18670, 18690, 18691, 
18865, 18871.3, 18871.4, 18873, 18873.1 through 
18873.5, 18938.3, 18944.11, and 19990; and Gov- 
ernment Code Section 12955. 1. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 17000 
through 17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200 
through 18700, 18860 through 18874, 18938.6, 
18941, 19890, 19891, 19892 and 19960 through 
19997; Civil Code Sections 1101.4, 1101.5 and 
1954.201; and Government Code Sections 12955.1 
and 12955.1.1. California Code of Regulations, Title 
20, Sections 1605.1, 1605.3 and 1607; and Title 25, 
Sections 1042 and 2042. 


1.8.3 Local Enforcing Agency. 


1.8.3.1 Duties and Powers. The building department of 
every city, county, or city and county shall enforce all the 
provisions of law, this code, and the other rules and reg- 
ulations promulgated by the Department of Housing and 
Community Development pertaining to the installation, 
erection, construction, reconstruction, movement, 
enlargement, conversion, alteration, repair, removal, 
demolition, or arrangement of apartments, condomini- 
ums, hotels, motels, lodging houses, and dwellings, 
including accessory buildings, facilities, and uses 
thereto. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


The provisions regulating the erection and con- 
struction of dwellings and appurtenant structures shall 
not apply to existing structures as to which construction 
is commenced or approved prior to the effective date of 
these regulations. Requirements relating to use, mainte- 
nance, and occupancy shall apply to all dwellings and 
appurtenant structures approved for construction or con- 
structed before or after the effective date of this code. 


For additional information regarding the use and 
occupancy of existing buildings and appurtenant struc- 
tures, see California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Divi- 
sion I, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, commencing with 
Section 1. 


1.8.3.2 Laws, Rules, and Regulations. Other than the 
building standards contained in this code, and notwith- 
standing other provisions of law, the statutory authority 
and location of the laws, rules, and regulations to be 
enforced by local enforcing agencies are listed by statute 
in Sections 1.8.3.2.1 through 1.8.3.2.5 below: 


1.8.3.2.1 State Housing Law. Refer to the State 
Housing Law, California Health and Safety Code, 
Division 13, Part 1.5, commencing with Section 
17910, and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, 
Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, commencing 
with Section 1, for the erection, construction, recon- 
struction, movement, enlargement, conversion, 
alteration, repair, removal, demolition, or arrange- 
ment of apartments, condominiums, hotels, motels, 
lodging houses, and dwellings, including accessory 
buildings, facilities, and uses thereto. 


1.8.3.2.2 Mobilehome Parks Act. Refer to the 
Mobilehome Parks Act, California Health and 
Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.1, commencing 
with Section 18200 and California Code of Regula- 
tions, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, commencing 
with Section 1000 for mobilehome park administra- 
tive and enforcement authority, permits, plans, fees, 
violations, inspections, and penalties both within 
and outside mobilehome parks. 


Exception: Mobilehome parks where the Depart- 
ment of Housing and Community Development is the 
enforcing agency. 

1.8.3.2.3 Special Occupancy Parks Act. Refer to the 
Special Occupancy Parks Act, California Health and 
Safety Code, Division 13, Part 2.3, commencing with 
Section 18860 and California Code of Regulations, 
Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, commencing with 
Section 2000 for special occupancy park adminis- 
trative and enforcement authority, permits, fees, vio- 
lations, inspections, and penalties both within and 
outside of special occupancy parks. 


Exception: Special occupancy parks where the 
Department of Housing and Community Develop- 
ment is the enforcing agency. 

1.8.3.2.4 Employee Housing Act. Refer to the 
Employee Housing Act, California Health and 
Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, commencing with 
Section 17000 and California Code of Regulations, 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 3, com- 
mencing with Section 600 for employee housing 
administrative and enforcement authority, permits, 
fees, violations, inspections, and penalties. 

1.8.3.2.5 Factory-Built Housing Law. Refer to the 
Factory-Built Housing Law, California Health and 
Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6 commencing with 
Section 19960 and California Code of Regulations, 
Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, com- 
mencing with Section 3000 for factory-built housing 
administrative and enforcement authority, permits, 
fees, violations, inspections, and penalties. 


1.8.4 Permits, Fees, Applications, and Inspections. 


1.8.4.1 Permits. A written construction permit shall be 
obtained from the enforcing agency prior to the erection, 
construction, reconstruction, installation, relocation, or 
alteration of any plumbing system. 


Exceptions: 


1. Work exempt from permits as specified in Chapter 
1, Administration, Division II, Section 104.2 items 
(1)-(2) of this code. 

2. Changes, alterations, or repairs of a minor nature 
not affecting structural features, egress, sanitation, 
safety, or accessibility as determined by the enforc- 
ing agency. 

3. Retroactive permits issued in accordance with 
Health and Safety Code Section 17958. 12. 


Exemptions from permit requirements shall not 
be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be 
done in any manner in violation of other provisions 
of law or this code. 


1.8.4.2 Fees. Subject to other provisions of law, the gov- 
erning body of any city, county, or city and county may 
prescribe fees to defray the cost of enforcement of rules 
and regulations promulgated by the Department of Hous- 
ing and Community Development. The amount of the fees 
shall not exceed the amount reasonably necessary to 
administer or process permits, certificates, forms, or 
other documents, or to defray the costs of enforcement. 
For additional information, see State Housing Law, 
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, Section 
17951 and California Code of Regulations, Title 25, 
Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, Article 3, com- 
mencing with Section 6. 


1.8.4.3 Plan Review and Time Limitations. Subject to 
other provisions of law, provisions related to plan check- 
ing, prohibition of excessive delays, and contracting with 
or employment of private parties to perform plan check- 
ing are set forth in the State Housing Law, Health and 
Safety Code Section 17960. 1, and for employee housing, 
in Health and Safety Code Section 17021. 


1.8.4.3.1 Retention of Plans. The building depart- 
ment of every city, county, or city and county shall 
maintain an official copy, microfilm, or electronic 
or other type of photographic copy of the plans of 
every building, during the life of the building, for 
which the department issued a building permit. 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Exceptions: 


I. Single or multiple dwellings not more than two 
stories and basement in height. 


2. Garages and other structures appurtenant to 
buildings listed in Exception 1. 


3. Farm or ranch buildings appurtenant to build- 
ings listed in Exception 1. 


4. Anyone-story building where the span between 
bearing walls does not exceed 25 feet (7620 
mm), except a steel frame or concrete building. 


All plans for common interest develop- 
ments as defined in Section 4100 of the Cali- 
fornia Civil Code shall be retained. For 
additional information regarding plan retention 
and reproduction of plans by an enforcing 
agency, see Health and Safety Code Sections 
19850 through 19852. 


1.8.4.4 Inspections. Construction or work for which a 
permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the 
building official and such construction or work shall 
remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes 
until approved. Approval as a result of an inspection 
shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of 
the provisions of this code or other regulations of the 
Department of Housing and Community Development. 


1.8.5 Right of Entry for Enforcement. 


10 


1.8.5.1 General. Subject to other provisions of law, offi- 
cers and agents of the enforcing agency may enter and 
inspect public and private properties to secure compli- 
ance with the rules and regulations promulgated by the 
Department of Housing and Community Development. 
For limitations and additional information regarding 
enforcement, see the following: 


I. For applications subject to State Housing Law as 
referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer to 
Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, com- 
mencing with Section 17910, and California Code 
of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Sub- 
chapter 1, commencing with Section 1. 


2. For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 
2.1, commencing with Section 18200, and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, 
commencing with Section 1000. 


3. For applications subject to the Special Occupancy 
Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this 
code, refer to Health and Safety Code Division 13, 
Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860, and Cal- 
ifornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000. 


4. For applications subject to the Employee Housing 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, 
commencing with Section 17000, and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, 
Subchapter 3, commencing with Section 600. 


5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Hous- 
ing Law as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.5 of this 
code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, 
Part 6, commencing with Section 19960, and Cali- 
fornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 3, Subchapter 1, commencing with Section 
3000. 


1.8.6 Local Modification by Ordinance or Regulation. 


1.8.6.1 General. Subject to other provisions of law, a city, 
county, or city and county may make changes to the pro- 
visions adopted by the Department of Housing and Com- 
munity Development. If any city, county, or city and 
county does not amend, add, or repeal by local ordi- 
nances or regulations the provisions published in this 
code or other regulations promulgated by the Depart- 
ment of Housing and Community Development, those 
provisions shall be applicable and shall become effec- 
tive 180 days after publication by the California Build- 
ing Standards Commission. Amendments, additions, and 
deletions to this code adopted by a city, county, or city 
and county pursuant to California Health and Safety 
Code Sections 17958.5, 17958.7, and 18941.5, together 
with all applicable portions of this code, shall also 
become effective 180 days after publication of the Cali- 
fornia Building Standards Code by the California Build- 
ing Standards Commission. 


1.8.6.2 Findings, Filings, and Rejections of Local Mod- 
ifications. Prior to making any modifications or estab- 
lishing more restrictive building standards, the governing 
body shall make express findings and filings, as required 
by California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7, 
showing that such modifications are reasonably neces- 
sary due to local climatic, geological, or topographical 
conditions. No modification shall become effective or 
operative unless the following requirements are met: 


1. The express findings shall be made available as a 
public record. 


2. Acopy of the modification and express finding, each 
document marked to cross-reference the other, shall 
be filed with the California Building Standards 
Commission for a city, county, or a city and county, 
and with the Department of Housing and Commu- 
nity Development for fire protection districts. 

3. The California Building Standards Commission has 
not rejected the modification or change. 

Nothing in this section shall limit the authority 


of fire protection districts pursuant to California 
Health and Safety Code Section 13869. 7(a). 


1.8.7 Alternate Materials, Designs, Tests, and Methods of 
Construction. 


1.8.7.1 General. The provisions of this code, as adopted 
by the Department of Housing and Community Develop- 
ment, are not intended to prevent the use of any alternate 
material, appliance, installation, device, arrangement, 
design, or method of construction not specifically pre- 
scribed by this code. Consideration and approval of 
alternates shall comply with Section 1.8.7.2 for local 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


building departments and Section 1.8.7.3 for the Depart- 
ment of Housing and Community Development. 


1.8.7.2 Local Building Departments. The building depart- 
ment of any city, county, or city and county may approve 
alternates for use in the erection, construction, recon- 
struction, movement, enlargement, conversion, alteration, 
repair, removal, demolition, or arrangement of apartments, 
condominiums, hotels, motels, lodging houses, dwellings, 
or accessory structures, except for the following: 


1. Structures located in mobilehome parks as defined 
in California Health and Safety Code Section 18214. 


2. Structures located in special occupancy parks as 
defined in California Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tion 18862.43. 


3. Factory-built housing as defined in California 
Health and Safety Code Section 19971. 


1.8.7.2.1 Approval of Alternates. The consideration 
and approval of alternates by a local building 
department shall comply with the following proce- 
dures and limitations: 


I The approval shall be granted on a case-by- 
case basis. 


2. Evidence shall be submitted to substantiate 
claims that the proposed alternate, in perform- 
ance, safety, and protection of life and health, 
conforms to, or is at least equivalent to, the 
standards contained in this code and other rules 
and regulations promulgated by the Department 
of Housing and Community Development. 


3. Thelocal building department may require tests 
performed by an approved testing agency at the 
expense of the owner or owner 5 agent as proof 
of compliance. 


4. Ifthe proposed alternate is related to accessibil- 
ity in covered multifamily dwellings or facilities 
serving covered multifamily dwellings, as 
defined in Chapter 2 of the California Building 
Code, the proposed alternate must also meet the 
threshold set for equivalent facilitation as 
defined in Chapter 2 of the California Building 
Code. 


For additional information regarding approval 
of alternates by a local building department pur- 
suant to the State Housing Law, see California 
Health and Safety Code Section 17951(e) and Cali- 
fornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 1, Subchapter 1. 


1.8.7.3 Department of Housing and Community Devel- 
opment. The Department of Housing and Community 
Development may approve alternates for use in the erec- 
tion, construction, reconstruction, movement, enlarge- 
ment, conversion, alteration, repair, removal, or 
demolition of apartments, condominiums, hotels, motels, 
lodging houses, dwellings, or accessory structures 
thereto, and permanent buildings in mobilehome parks 
and special occupancy parks. The consideration and 
approval of alternates shall comply with the following: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


1. The department may require tests at the expense of 
the owner or owner 5 agent to substantiate compli- 
ance with the California Building Standards Code. 


2. The approved alternate shall, for its intended pur- 
pose, be at least equivalent in performance and 
safety to the materials, designs, tests, or methods of 
construction prescribed by this code. 


1.8.8 Appeals Board. 


1.8.8.1 General. Every city, county, or city and county 
shall establish a process to hear and decide appeals of 
orders, decisions, and determinations made by the enforc- 
ing agency relative to the application and interpretation 
of this code and other regulations governing construction 
use, maintenance and change of occupancy. The govern- 
ing body of any city, county, or city and county may estab- 
lish a local appeals board and a housing appeals board 
to serve this purpose. Members of the appeals board(s) 
shall not be employees of the enforcing agency and shall 
be knowledgeable in the applicable building codes, reg- 
ulations and ordinances as determined by the governing 
body of the city, county, or city and county. 


Where no such appeals boards or agencies have 
been established, the governing body of the city, county, 
or city and county shall serve as the local appeals board 
or housing appeals board as specified in California 
Health and Safety Code Sections 17920.5 and 17920.6. 


1.8.8.2 Definitions. The following terms shall for the 
purposes of this section have the meaning shown. 


Housing Appeals Board. The board or agency of a city, 
county, or city and county which is authorized by the gov- 
erning body of the city, county, or city and county to hear 
appeals regarding the requirements of the city, county, 
or city and county relating to the use, maintenance, and 
change of occupancy of buildings and structures, includ- 
ing requirements governing alteration, additions, repair, 
demolition, and moving. In any area in which there is no 
such board or agency, "Housing appeals board" means 
the local appeals board having jurisdiction over the area. 


Local Appeals Board. The board or agency of a city, 
county, or city and county which is authorized by the gov- 
erning body of the city, county, or city and county to hear 
appeals regarding the building requirements of the city, 
county, or city and county. In any area in which there is 
no such board or agency, "Local appeals board" means 
the governing body of the city, county, or city and county 
having jurisdiction over the area. 


1.8.8.3 Appeals. Except as otherwise provided by law, 
any person, firm, or corporation adversely affected by a 
decision, order, or determination by a city, county, or city 
and county relating to the application of building stan- 
dards published in the California Building Standards 
Code, or any other applicable rule or regulation adopted 
by the Department of Housing and Community Develop- 
ment, or any lawfully enacted ordinance by a city, county, 
or city and county, may appeal the issue for resolution 
to the local appeals board or housing appeals board as 
appropriate. 


11 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


The local appeals board shall hear appeals relating 
to new building construction and the housing appeals 
board shall hear appeals relating to existing buildings. 


1.8.9 Unsafe Buildings or Structures. 


1.8.9.1 Authority to Enforce. Subject to other provisions 
of law, the administration, enforcement, actions, pro- 
ceedings, abatement, violations, and penalties for unsafe 
buildings and structures are contained in the following 
statutes and regulations: 


I. For applications subject to the State Housing Law 
as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer 
to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, 
commencing with Section 17910 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, 
Subchapter 1, commencing with Section 1. For 
enforcement related to accessory dwelling units, see 
Health and Safety Code Section 17980.12, operative 
until January 1, 2035. 


2. For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 
2.1, commencing with Section 18200 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, 
commencing with Section 1000. 


3. For applications subject to the Special Occupancy 
Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this 
code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, 
Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and Cal- 
ifornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000. 


4. For applications subject to the Employee Housing 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, 
commencing with Section 17000 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, 
Subchapter 3, commencing with Section 600. 


5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Housing 
Law as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.5 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, 
commencing with Section 19960 and California Code 
of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Sub- 
chapter 1, commencing with Section 3000. 


1.8.9.2 Actions and Proceedings. Subject to other pro- 
visions of law, punishments, penalties, and fines for vio- 
lations of building standards are contained in the 
following statutes and regulations: 


I. For applications subject to the State Housing Law 
as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.1 of this code, refer 
to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, 
commencing with Section 17910 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, 
Subchapter 1, commencing with Section 1. 

2. For applications subject to the Mobilehome Parks 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 


2.1, commencing with Section 18200 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2, 
commencing with Section 1000. 


3. For applications subject to the Special Occupancy 
Parks Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this 
code, refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, 
Part 2.3, commencing with Section 18860 and Cal- 
ifornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 2.2, commencing with Section 2000. 


4. For applications subject to the Employee Housing 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.4 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 1, 
commencing with Section 17000 and California 
Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, 
Subchapter 3, commencing with Section 600. 


5. For applications subject to the Factory-Built Housing 
Law as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.5 of this code, 
refer to Health and Safety Code, Division 13, Part 6, 
commencing with Section 19960 and California Code 
of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 3, Sub- 
chapter 1, commencing with Section 3000. 


1.8.10 Other Building Regulations. 


1.8.10.1 Existing Structures. Notwithstanding other pro- 
visions of law, the replacement, retention, and extension 
of original materials and the use of original methods of 
construction for any existing building or accessory struc- 
ture, or portions thereof, shall be permitted in accor- 
dance with the provisions of this code and the California 
Existing Building Code, as adopted by the Department of 
Housing and Community Development. For additional 
information, see California Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tions 17912, 17920.3, 17922 and 17958.8. 


1.8.10.2 Moved Structures. Subject to the requirements 
of California Health and Safety Code Sections 17922, 
17922.3 and 17958.9, local ordinances or regulations 
relating to a moved residential building or accessory 
structure thereto, shall permit the replacement, retention, 
and extension of original materials and the use of origi- 
nal methods of construction so long as the structure does 
not become or continue to be a substandard building. 


Note: 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
17040, 17050, 17920.9, 17921, 17921.5, 17921.6, 
17921.10, 17922, 17922.6, 17922.12, 17922.14, 17926, 
17927, 17928, 17958.12, 18552, 18554, 18620, 18630, 
18640, 18670, 18690, 18691, 18865, 18871.3, 18871.4, 
18873, 18873.1 through 18873.5, 18938.3, and 19990, 
and Government Code Sections 12955.1 and 12855.1.1. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 17000 
through 17062.5, 17910 through 17995.5, 18200 through 
18700, 18860 through 18874, 18938.6, 18941, 18941.5, 
19890, 19891, 19892 and 19960 through 19997; Civil 
Code Sections 1101.4, 1101.5, 1954.201, 1954.202 and 
5551; and Government Code Sections 8698.4, 12955.1, 
12955.1.1 and 65852.2. California Code of Regulations, 
Title 20, Sections 1605.1, 1605.3 and 1607. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1.9.0 Division of the State Architect. 


1.9.1 Division of the State Architect — Access Compliance. 
Note: Buildings or facilities where accessibility is required 
for applications listed in California Code of Regulations, Title 
24, Part 2 (California Building Code), Chapter 1, Section 
1.9.1 regulated by the Division of the State Architect-Access 
Compliance shall comply with Title 24, Part 2, Chapter 11A 
or 11B, as applicable under authority cited by CA Govern- 
ment Code Section 4450 and in reference cited by CA Gov- 
ernment Code Sections 4450 through 4461, 12955.1(c), and 
CA Health and Safety Code Sections 18949.1, 19952 through 
19959. 


1.9.1.1 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.9.1 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the acronym DSA-AC. 


1.9.2 Division of the State Architect — Structural Safety. 


1.9.2.1 DSA-SS (Division of the State Architect — Struc- 
tural Safety). 

Application — Public elementary and secondary schools, 
community college buildings, and state-owned or state- 
leased essential services buildings. 


Enforcing Agency — Division of the State Architect — 
Structural Safety (DSA-SS). 


The Division of the State Architect has been dele- 
gated the responsibility and authority by the Department 
of General Services to review and approve the design and 
oversee and observe the construction of public elemen- 
tary and secondary schools, community colleges, and 
state-owned or state-leased essential services buildings. 


Authority Cited — Education Code Section 17310 and 
81142, and Health and Safety Code Section 16022. 


References — Education Code Sections 17280 through 
17317 and 81130 through 81147, and Health and Safety 
Code Sections 16000 through 16023. 


1.9.2.1.1 Adopting Agency Identification. The pro- 
visions of this code applicable to buildings identi- 
fied in this Subsection 1.9.2.1 will be identified in 
the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym DSA- 
SS. 


1.9.2.2 DSA-SS/CC (Division of the State Architect — 
Structural Safety/Community Colleges). 


Application — Community Colleges. 


The Division of the State Architect has been dele- 
gated the authority by the Department of General Serv- 
ices to promulgate alternate building standards for 
application to community colleges, which a community 
college may elect to use in lieu of standards promulgated 
by DSA-SS in accordance with Section 1.9.2.1. Refer to 
Title 24, Part 2, Section 1.9.2.2. 


Enforcing Agency — Division of the State Architect — 
Structural Safety/Community Colleges (DSA-SS/CC). 


The Division of the State Architect has been dele- 
gated the authority by the Department of General Serv- 
ices to review and approve the design and oversee and 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


observe the construction of community colleges electing 
to use the alternative building standards as provided in 
this section. 

Authority Cited — Education Code Section 81053. 


References — Education Code Sections 81052, 81053, 
and 81130 through 81147. 


1.9.2.2.1 Adopting Agency Identification. The provi- 
sions of this code applicable to buildings identified in 
this Subsection 1.9.2.2 will be identified in the Matrix 
Adoption Tables under the acronym DSA-SS/CC. 


1.10.0 Department of Health Care Access and Informa- 
tion/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development. 


1.10.1 OSHPD 1 and OSHPD ІК. Specific scope of appli- 
cation of the agency responsible for enforcement, enforce- 
ment agency, specific authority to adopt and enforce such 
provisions of this code, unless otherwise stated. 


OSHPD 1 апа OSHPD IR 


Application – [OSHPD 1] General acute care hospital build- 
ings. [OSHPD IR] Non-conforming hospital SPC or free- 
standing buildings that have been removed from acute care 
service. 


Enforcing Agency — Health Care Access and Informa- 
tion/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Development 
(OSHPD). The office shall enforce the Division of the State 
Architect access compliance regulations and the regulations 
of the Office of the State Fire Marshal for the above stated 
facility types. 

1.10.1.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


1. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapters 6 and 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Sections 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1, Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter 1, 
Division II. 


1.10.1.2 Applicable Building Standards. California 
Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 
10, and 11. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
127010, 127015, 1275, and 129850. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 19958, 
127010, 127015, 129680, 1275, and 129675 through 
130070. 


1.10.1.3 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.1 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the acronym OSHPD 1, and OSHPD 1R. 


1.10.2 OSHPD 2. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, enforcement agency, specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 

OSHPD 2 

Application — Skilled nursing facilities and intermediate 

care facility buildings. 


13 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Enforcing Agency — Health Care Access and Informa- 
tion/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Devel- 
opment (OSHPD). The office shall also enforce the 
Division of the State Architect access compliance regu- 
lations and the regulations of the Office of the State Fire 
Marshal for the above stated facility type. 


1.10.2.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


1. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapter 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Sections 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1, Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter 1, 
Division П. 


1.10.2.2 Applicable Building Standards. California 
Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 
10, and 11. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
127010, 127015, 1275, and 129850. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 127010, 
127015, 1275, and 129680. 


1.10.2.3 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.2 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the acronym OSHPD 2. 


1.10.3 OSHPD 3. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, enforcement agency, specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 


OSHPD 3 


Application — Licensed clinics and any freestanding 
building under a hospital license where outpatient clin- 
ical services are provided. 


Enforcing Agency — Local building department. 
1.10.3.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


1. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapter 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Sections 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1, Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter 1, 
Division П. 


1.10.3.2 Applicable Building Standards. California 
Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 
10, and 11. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
127010, 127015, and 1226. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 127010, 
127015, 129885, and 1226, Government Code Section 
54350, and State Constitution Article 11, Section 7. 


1.10.3.3 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.3 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the acronym OSHPD 3. 


1.10.4 OSHPD 4. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, enforcement agency, specific 
authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this code, 
unless otherwise stated. 


14 


OSHPD 4 
Application — Correctional Treatment Centers. 


Enforcing Agency — Health Care Access and Informa- 
tion/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Devel- 
opment (OSHPD). The office shall also enforce the 
Division of the State Architect access compliance regu- 
lations and the regulations of the Office of the State Fire 
Marshal for the above stated facility types. 


1.10.4.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


I. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapter 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Sections 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1, Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter 1, 
Division II. 


1.10.4.2 Applicable Building Standards. California 
Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 
10 and 11. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 
127010, 127015, and 129790. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 127010, 
127015, 1275, and 129675 through 130070. 


1.10.4.3. Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.4 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the acronym OSHPD 4. 


1.10.5 OSHPD 5. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, enforcement agency and the spe- 
cific authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this 
code, unless otherwise stated. 


OSHPD 5 

Application — Acute psychiatric hospital buildings. 
Enforcing Agency — Health Care Access and Informa- 
tion/Office of Statewide Hospital Planning and Devel- 
opment (OSHPD). The office shall also enforce the 
Division of the State Architect — Access Compliance reg- 
ulations and the regulations of the Office of the State Fire 
Marshal for the above-stated facility types. 

1.10.5.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


1. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapter 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Sections 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1, Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter I, 
Division П. 


1.10.5.2 Applicable Building Standards. California 
Building Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 
10 and 11. 

Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 1275 
and 129850. 

References — Health and Safety Code Sections 129680, 
1275 and 129675 through 130070. 

1.10.5.3 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.5 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the Acronym OSHPD 5. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1.10.6 OSHPD 6. Specific scope of application of the agency 
responsible for enforcement, enforcement agency and the spe- 
cific authority to adopt and enforce such provisions of this 
code, unless otherwise stated. 


OSHPD 6 

Application — Chemical dependency recovery hospital 
not within an acute care hospital building or an acute 
psychiatric facility. 

Enforcing Agency — Local building department. 
1.10.6.1 Applicable Administrative Standards. 


1. Title 24, Part 1, California Code of Regulations: 
Chapter 7. 


2. Title 24, Part 2, California Code of Regulations: 
Section 1.1.0 and 1.10.0, Chapter 1 Division I, and 
as indicated in the adoption matrix for Chapter I, 
Division II. 


1.10.6.2 Applicable Building Standards. California Build- 
ing Standards Code, Title 24, Parts 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10 and 
П. 


The provision of Title 24, Part 2, as adopted and 
amended by OSHPD, shall apply to the applications 
listed in Section 1.10.6. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 1275, 
18929 and 129850. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 1250.3 
and 129675-130070. 


1.10.6.3 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions 
of this code applicable to buildings identified in this Sub- 
section 1.10.6 will be identified in the Matrix Adoption 
Tables under the Acronym OSHPD 6. 


1.11.0 Office of the State Fire Marshal. 


1.11.1 SFM-Office of the State Fire Marshal. Specific scope 
of application of the agency responsible for enforcement, the 
enforcement agency and the specific authority to adopt and 
enforce such provisions of this code, unless otherwise stated. 
Application: 

Institutional, Educational, or any Similar Occupancy. Any 
building or structure used or intended for use as an asylum, 
jail, mental hospital, hospital, sanitarium, home for the aged, 
children’s nursery, children s home, school, or any similar 
occupancy of any capacity. 

Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Assembly or Similar Place of Assemblage. Any theater, 
dancehall, skating rink, auditorium, assembly hall, meeting 
hall, nightclub, fair building, or similar place of assemblage 
where 50 or more persons may gather together in a building, 
room or structure for the purpose of amusement, entertain- 
ment, instruction, deliberation, worship, drinking or dining, 
awaiting transportation, or education. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION 1 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Small Family Day-Care Homes. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.45, 
1597.54, 13143, and 17921. 


Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Large Family Day-Care Homes. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 1597.46, 
1597.54, and 17921. 


Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Residential Facilities and Residential Facilities for the Eld- 
erly. 

Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13133. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Any State Institution or Other State-Owned or Specified 
State-Occupied Building. 


Specified State-Occupied Buildings. Any building, structure 
or area that meets any of the following criteria: 


I. A building where the state has contracted into a build-to- 
suit lease. 


2. Acourthouse holding facility or trial court with a deten- 
tion area. 


3. A building used by the Department of Corrections and 
Rehabilitation (CDCR) as a community correctional 
reentry center. 


4. 100 percent state occupied. 


5. State-occupied areas in a state-leased building that is a 
high-rise and is 75 percent of the net area floor space or 
more occupied by state entities. 


6. State-occupied areas in a building that contains 5,000 
square feet (465 m?) or more space of state-leased Group 
H or Group L occupancy. 


7. A state-leased building with facilities with the primary 
purpose of housing state records and/or state artifacts of 
historical significance. 


ბ. Properties leased by California State University (CSU). 
9. State institutions and their real property. 
10. CAL FIRE occupied areas in leased buildings. 


ll. State-leased facilities where the governing body 5 fire pro- 
tection services rely on an all-volunteer fire department. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 13108, 
13145, 13146, 16022.5 and 17921. 


Reference — Health and Safety Code Sections 13108, 13143, 
13145, 13146, 16022.5 and 17921. 


High-Rise Structures. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13211. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Motion Picture Production Studios. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143.1. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


15 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


Organized Camps. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 18897.3. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Residential. All hotels, motels, lodging houses, apartment 
houses and dwellings, including congregate residences and 
buildings and structures accessory thereto. Multiple-story 
structures existing on January 1, 1975, let for human habita- 
tion, including and limited to, hotels, motels, apartment 
houses, less than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the lowest floor 
level having building access, wherein rooms used for sleep- 
ing are let above the ground floor. 

Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 13143.2 
and 17921. 

Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Residential Care Facilities. Certified family-care homes, out- 
of-home placement facilities, halfway houses, drug and/or 
alcohol rehabilitation facilities, and any building or structure 
used or intended for use as a home or institution for the hous- 
ing of any person of any age when such person is referred to 
or placed within such home or institution for protective social 
care and supervision services by any governmental agency. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Tents, Awnings, or Other Fabric Enclosures Used in Con- 
nection with Any Occupancy. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13116. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Fire Alarm Devices, Equipment, and Systems in Connec- 
tion with Any Occupancy. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13114. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Hazardous Materials. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143.9. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Flammable and Combustible Liquids. 
Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143.6. 
Reference — Health and Safety Code Section 13143. 


Public School Automatic Fire Detection, Alarm, and Sprin- 
kler Systems. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Section 13143 and 
California Education Code Article 7.5, Sections 17074.50, 
17074.52, and 17074.54. 


References — Government Code Section 11152.5, Health and 
Safety Code Section 13143 and California Education Code 
Chapter 12.5, Leroy F. Greene School Facilities Act of 1998, 
Article 1. 


16 


Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area. 


Authority Cited — Health and Safety Code Sections 13143, 
13108.5(a), and 18949.2(b) and (c); and Government Code 
Section 51189. 


References — Health and Safety Code Sections 13143, Gov- 
ernment Code Sections 51176, 51177, 51176, and 51179; and 
Public Resources Code Sections 4201 through 4204. 


1.11.2 Duties and Powers of the Enforcing Agency. 
1.11.2.1 Enforcement. 


1.11.2.1.1 The responsibility for enforcement of 
building standards adopted by the State Fire Mar- 
shal and published in the California Building Stan- 
dards Code relating to fire and panic safety and 
other regulations of the State Fire Marshal shall 
except as provided in Section 1.11.2.1.2 be as fol- 
lows: 


I. The city, county, or city and county, with juris- 
diction in the area affected by the standard or 
regulation shall delegate the enforcement of the 
building standards relating to fire and panic 
safety and other regulations of the State Fire 
Marshal as they relate to Group R-3 occupan- 
cies, as described in Section 310.1 of Part 2 of 
the California Building Standards Code, to 
either of the following: 


1.1. The chief of the fire authority of the city, 
county, or city, and county or an authorized rep- 
resentative. 


1.2. The chief building official of the city, 
county, or city and county, or an authorized rep- 
resentative. 


2. The chief of any city or county fire department 
or of any fire protection district, and authorized 
representatives, shall enforce within the juris- 
diction the building standards and other regu- 
lations of the State Fire Marshal, except those 
described in Item 1 or 4. 


3. The State Fire Marshal shall have authority to 
enforce the building standards and other regu- 
lations of the State Fire Marshal in areas out- 
side of corporate cities and districts providing 
fire protection services. 


4. The State Fire Marshal shall have authority to 
enforce the building standards and other regu- 
lations of the State Fire Marshal in corporate 
cities and districts providing fire-protection 
services on request of the chief fire official or 
the governing body. 


5. Any fee charged pursuant to the enforcement 
authority of this section shall not exceed the 
estimated reasonable cost of providing the serv- 
ice for which the fee is charged pursuant to Sec- 
tion 66014 of the Government Code. 


1.11.2.1.2 Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tion 13108, and except as otherwise provided in this 
section, building standards adopted by the State Fire 
Marshal published in the California Building Stan- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


dards Code relating to fire and panic safety shall be 
enforced by the State Fire Marshal in all state- 
owned buildings, state-occupied buildings, and state 
institutions throughout the state. Upon the written 
request of the chief fire official of any city, county, or 
fire-protection district, the State Fire Marshal may 
authorize such chief fire official and his or her 
authorized representatives, in their geographical 
area of responsibility, to make fire-prevention 
inspections of state-owned or state-occupied build- 
ings, other than state institutions, for the purpose of 
enforcing the regulations relating to fire and panic 
safety adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to 
this section and building standards relating to fire 
and panic safety published in the California Build- 
ing Standards Code. Authorization from the State 
Fire Marshal shall be limited to those fire depart- 
ments or fire districts which maintain a fire-preven- 
tion bureau staffed by paid personnel. 


Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 
13108, any requirement or order made by any chief 
fire official who is authorized by the State Fire Mar- 
shal to make fire-prevention inspections of state- 
owned or state-occupied buildings, other than state 
institutions, may be appealed to the State Fire Mar- 
shal. The State Fire Marshal shall, upon receiving 
an appeal and subject to the provisions of Chapter 
5 (commencing with Section 18945) of Part 2.5 of 
Division 13 of the Health and Safety Code, deter- 
mine if the requirement or order made is reasonably 
consistent with the fire and panic safety regulations 
adopted by the State Fire Marshal and building 
standards relating to fire and panic safety published 
in the California Building Code. 


Any person may request a code interpretation 
from the State Fire Marshal relative to the intent of 
any regulation or provision adopted by the State 
Fire Marshal. When the request relates to a specific 
project, occupancy or building, the State Fire Mar- 
shal shall review the issue with the appropriate local 
enforcing agency prior to rendering such code inter- 
pretation. 


1.11.2.1.3 Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tion 13112, any person who violates any order, rule 
or regulation of the State Fire Marshal is guilty of a 
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than 
$100.00 or more than $500.00, or by imprisonment 
for not less than six months, or by both. A person is 
guilty of a separate offense each day during which 
he or she commits, continues, or permits a violation 
of any provision of, or any order, rule or regulation 
of, the State Fire Marshal as contained in this code. 
Any inspection authority who, in the exercise of 
his or her authority as a deputy State Fire Marshal, 
causes any legal complaints to be filed or any arrest 
to be made shall notify the State Fire Marshal imme- 
diately following such action. 
1.11.2.2 Right of Entry. The fire chief of any city, county, 
or fire-protection district, or such person's authorized 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


representative, may enter any state institution or any 
other state-owned or state-occupied building for the pur- 
pose of preparing a fire-suppression preplanning pro- 
gram or for the purpose of investigating any fire in a 
state-occupied building. 


The State Fire Marshal, his or her deputies or 
salaried assistants, the chief of any city or county fire 
department or fire-protection district and his or her 
authorized representatives may enter any building or 
premises not used for dwelling purposes at any reason- 
able hour for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. The 
owner, lessee, manager, or operator of any such building 
or premises shall permit the State Fire Marshal, his or her 
deputies or salaried assistants and the chief of any city or 
county fire department or fire-protection district and his or 
her authorized representatives to enter and inspect them at 
the time and for the purpose stated in this section. 


1.11.2.3 More Restrictive Fire and Panic Safety Build- 
ing Standards. 


1.11.2.3.1 Any fire-protection district organized pur- 
suant to Health and Safety Code Part 2.7 (com- 
mencing with Section 13800) of Division 12 may 
adopt building standards relating to fire and panic 
safety that are more stringent than those building 
standards adopted by the State Fire Marshal and 
contained in the California Building Standards 
Code. For these purposes, the district board shall 
be deemed a legislative body and the district shall be 
deemed a local agency. Any changes or modifica- 
tions that are more stringent than the requirements 
published in the California Building Standards Code 
relating to fire and panic safety shall be subject to 
Section 1.1.8.1. 


1.11.2.3.2 Any fire protection district that proposes 
to adopt an ordinance pursuant to this section shall, 
not less than 30 days prior to noticing a proposed 
ordinance for public hearing, provide a copy of that 
ordinance, together with the adopted findings made 
pursuant to Section 1.11.2.3.1, to the city, county, or 
city and county where the ordinance will apply. The 
city, county, or city and county may provide the dis- 
trict with written comments, which shall become part 
of the fire-protection district s public hearing record. 


1.11.2.3.3 The fire-protection district shall transmit 
the adopted ordinance to the city, county, or city and 
county where the ordinance will apply. The legisla- 
tive body of the city, county, or city and county may 
ratify, modify or deny an adopted ordinance and 
transmit its determination to the district within 15 
days of the determination. Any modification or 
denial of an adopted ordinance shall include a writ- 
ten statement describing the reasons for any modi- 
fications or denial. No ordinance adopted by the 
district shall be effective until ratification by the city, 
county, or city and county where the ordinance will 
apply. Upon ratification of an adopted ordinance, 
the city, county, or city and county shall file a copy 
of the findings of the district, and any findings of the 
city, county, or city and county together with the 


17 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


adopted ordinance expressly marked and identified 
to which each finding refers, in accordance with 
Section 1.1.8.1(3). 


1.11.2.4 Request for Alternate Means of Protection. 

Requests for approval to use an alternative material, 

assembly or materials, equipment, method of construc- 

tion, method of installation of equipment, or means of 
protection shall be made in writing to the enforcing 
agency by the owner or the owner 5 authorized represen- 

tative and shall be accompanied by a full statement of the 
conditions. Sufficient evidence or proof shall be submit- 

ted to substantiate any claim that may be made regarding 
its conformance. The enforcing agency may require tests 

and the submission of a test report from an approved test- 

ing organization as set forth in Title 19, California Code 
of Regulations, to substantiate the equivalency of the pro- 

posed alternative means of protection. 


When a request for alternate means of protection 
involves hazardous materials, the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction may consider implementation of the findings 
and recommendations identified in a Risk Management 
Plan (RMP) developed in accordance with Title 19, Divi- 
sion 2, Chapter 4.5, Article 3. 


Approval of a request for use of an alternative mate- 
rial, assembly of materials, equipment, method of con- 
struction, method of installation of equipment, or means 
of protection made pursuant to these provisions shall be 
limited to the particular case covered by request and 
shall not be construed as establishing any precedent for 
any future request. 


1.11.2.5 Appeals. When a request for an alternate means 
of protection has been denied by the enforcing agency, 
the applicant may file a written appeal to the State Fire 
Marshal for consideration of the applicant's proposal. In 
considering such appeal, the State Fire Marshal may 
seek the advice of the State Board of Fire Services. The 
State Fire Marshal shall, afier considering all of the facts 
presented, including any recommendations of the State 
Board of Fire Services, determine if the proposal is for 
the purposes intended, at least equivalent to that speci- 
fied in these regulations in quality, strength, effective- 
ness, fire resistance, durability, and safety, and shall 
transmit such findings and any recommendations to the 
applicant and to the enforcing agency. 


1.11.3 Construction Documents. In addition to the provisions 
of this Section, see Title 24, Part 2, California Building Code, 
Appendix Chapter 1, Section 106 for additional requirements. 


18 


1.11.3.1 Public Schools. Plans and specifications for the 
construction, alteration or addition to any building 
owned, leased or rented by any public school district 
shall be submitted to the Division of the State Architect. 


1.11.3.2 Movable Walls and Partitions. Plans or dia- 
grams shall be submitted to the enforcing agency for 
approval before the installation of, or rearrangement of, 
any movable wall or partition in any occupancy. 
Approval shall be granted only if there is no increase in 


the fire hazard. 


1.11.3.3 New Construction High-Rise Buildings. 


1. Complete plans or specifications, or both, shall be 
prepared covering all work required to comply with 
new construction high-rise buildings. Such plans 
and specifications shall be submitted to the enforc- 
ing agency having jurisdiction. 

2. Allplans and specifications shall be prepared under 
the responsible charge of an architect or a civil or 
structural engineer authorized by law to develop 
construction plans and specifications, or by both 
such architect and engineer. Plans and specifica- 
tions shall be prepared by an engineer duly quali- 
fied in that branch of engineering necessary to 
perform such services. Administration of the work 
of construction shall be under the charge of the 
responsible architect or engineer except that where 
plans and specifications involve alterations or 
repairs, such work of construction may be adminis- 
tered by an engineer duly qualified to perform such 
services and holding a valid certificate under Chap- 
ter 7 (commencing with Section 65700) of Division 
3 of the Business and Professions Code for per- 
formance of services in that branch of engineering 
in which said plans, specifications and estimates and 
work of construction are applicable. 


This section shall not be construed as prevent- 
ing the design of fire-extinguishing systems by per- 
sons holding a C-16 license issued pursuant to 
Division 3, Chapter 9, Business and Professions 
Code. In such instances, however, the responsibility 
charge of this section shall prevail. 


1.11.3.4 Existing High-Rise Buildings. 


1. Complete plans or specifications, or both, shall be 
prepared covering all work required by Section 3412 
for existing high-rise buildings. Such plans or spec- 
ifications shall be submitted to the enforcing agency 
having jurisdiction. 


2. When new construction is required to conform with 
the provisions of these regulations, complete plans 
or specifications, or both, shall be prepared in 
accordance with the provisions of this subsection. 
As used in this section "new construction" is not 
intended to include repairs, replacements or minor 
alterations which do not disrupt or appreciably add 
to or affect the structural aspects of the building. 

1.11.3.5 Retention of Plans. Refer to Building Standards 

Law, Health and Safety Code Sections 19850 and 19851, 

for permanent retention of plans. 


1.11.4 Fees. 


1.11.4.1 Other Fees. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code 
Section 13146.2, a city, county, or district which inspects 
a hotel, motel, lodging house, or apartment house may 
charge and collect a fee for the inspection from the owner 
of the structure in an amount, as determined by the city, 
county, or district, sufficient to pay its costs of that 
inspection. 

1.11.4.2 Large Family Day Care. Pursuant to Health 
and Safety Code Section 1597.46, Large Family Day- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Care Homes, the local government shall process any 
required permit as economically as possible, and fees 
charged for review shall not exceed the costs of the 
review and permit process. 


1.11.4.3 High-Rise. Pursuant to Health and Safety Code 
Section 13217, High-Rise Structure Inspection: Fees and 
Costs, a local agency which inspects a high-rise structure 
pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13217 may 
charge and collect a fee for the inspection from the owner 
of the high-rise structure in an amount, as determined by 
the local agency, sufficient to pay its costs of that inspec- 
tion. 


1.11.4.4 Fire Clearance Preinspection. Pursuant to 

Health and Safety Code Section 13235, Fire Clearance 
Preinspection, Fee; upon receipt of a request from a 

prospective licensee of a community care facility, as 

defined in Section 1502, of a residential-care facility for 
the elderly, as defined in Section 1569.2, or of a child 
day-care facility, as defined in Section 1596.750, the 
local fire enforcing agency, as defined in Section 13244, 

or State Fire Marshal, whichever has primary jurisdic- 

tion, shall conduct a preinspection of the facility prior to 

the final fire clearance approval. At the time of the prein- 

spection, the primary fire enforcing agency shall price 
consultation and interpretation of the fire safety regula- 

tions and shall notify the prospective licensee of the facil- 

ity in writing of the specific fire safety regulations which 
shall be enforced in order to obtain fire clearance 
approval. A fee equal to, but not exceeding, the actual 
cost of the of the preinspection services may be charged 
for the preinspection of a facility. 

1.11.4.5 Care Facilities. The primary fire enforcing 
agency shall complete the final fire clearance inspection 
for a community care facility, residential-care facility for 
the elderly, or child day-care facility within 30 days of 
receipt of the request for the final inspection, or as of the 
date the prospective facility requests the final prelicen- 
sure inspection by the State Department of Social Serv- 
ices, whichever is later. 


Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 13235, 
a preinspection fee equal to, but not exceeding, the actual 
cost of the of the preinspection services may be charged 
for the preinspection of a facility. 

Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 1313 1.5, 
a reasonable final inspection fee, not to exceed the actual 
cost of inspection services necessary to complete a final 


inspection may be charged for occupancies classified as 
residential-care facilities for the elderly (RCFE). 
Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 
1569.84, neither the State Fire Marshal nor any local 
public entity shall charge any fee for enforcing fire 
inspection regulations pursuant to state law or regula- 
tion or local ordinance, with respect to residential-care 
facilities for the elderly (RCFE) which service six or 
fewer persons. 
1.11.4.6 Requests of the Office of the State Fire Mar- 
shal. Whenever a local Authority Having Jurisdiction 
requests that the State Fire Marshal perform plan review 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION I CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATION 


and/or inspection services related to a building permit, 
the applicable fees for such shall be payable to the Office 
of the State Fire Marshal. 


1.11.5 Inspections. Work performed subject to the provisions 

of this code shall comply with the inspection requirements of 
Title 24, Part 2, California Building Standards Code, Sec- 

tions 109.1, 109.3, 109.3.4, 109.3.5, 109.3.6, 109.3.8, 

109.3.9, 109.3.10, 109.5, and 109.6 as adopted by the Office 
of the State Fire Marshal. 


1.11.5.1 Existing Group I-1 or R Occupancies. Licensed 
24-hour care in a Group I-1 or R occupancy in existence 
and originally classified under previously adopted state 
codes shall be reinspected under the appropriate previ- 
ous code, provided there is no change in the use or char- 
acter which would place the facility in a different 
occupancy group. 

1.11.6 Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy 

shall be issued as specified in Title 24, Part 2, California 

Building Code, Section 111. 


Exception: Certificates of occupancy are not required for 
work exempt from permits in accordance with Section 105.2 
of the California Building Code. 

1.11.7 Temporary Structures and Uses. See Title 24, Part 2, 
California Building Code, Section 108. 

1.11.8 Service Utilities. See Title 24, Part 2, California Build- 
ing Code, Section 112. 

1.11.9 Stop Work Order. See Title 24, Part 2, California 
Building Code, Section 115. 

1.11.10 Unsafe Buildings, Structures, and Equipment. See 
Title 24, Part 2, California Building Code, Section 116. 
1.11.11 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of 
this code applicable to buildings identified in this section will 


be identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
SFM. 


1.12.0 Reserved for the State Librarian. 


1.13.0 Department of Water Resources (DWR). 


1.13.1 Application — Design standards to safely plumb build- 
ings with both potable and recycled water systems. 


Enforcing Agency — State or local agency specified by the 
applicable provisions of law. 


Authority Cited — Water Code Section 13557. 
References — Water Code Section 13553. 


1.13.2 Adopting Agency Identification. The provisions of this 
code applicable to buildings identified in this section will be 
identified in the Matrix Adoption Tables under the acronym 
DWR. 


1.14.0 Reserved for the State Lands Commission. 


19 


20 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION II 
SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


101.0 General. 


101.1 Title. This document shall be known as the “Uniform 
Plumbing Code," may be cited as such, and will be referred 
to herein as “this code." 


101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to the 
erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replace- 
ment, addition to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems 
within this jurisdiction. 

101.3 Purpose. This code is an ordinance providing mini- 
mum requirements and standards for the protection of the 
public health, safety, and welfare. 


101.4 Unconstitutional. Where a section, subsection, sen- 
tence, clause, or phrase of this code is, for a reason, held to be 
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of 
the remaining portions of this code. The legislative body 
hereby declares that it would have passed this code, and each 
section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irre- 
spective of the fact that one or more sections, subsections, 
sentences, clauses, and phrases are declared unconstitutional. 


101.5 Validity. Where a provision of this code, or the appli- 
cation thereof to a person or circumstance, is held invalid, the 
remainder of the code, or the application of such provision to 
other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. 


102.0 Applicability. 


102.1 Conflicts Between Codes. Where the requirements 
within the jurisdiction of this plumbing code conflict with the 
requirements of the mechanical code, this code shall prevail. 
In instances where this code, applicable standards, or the 
manufacturer's installation instructions conflict, the more 
stringent provisions shall prevail. Where there 1s a conflict 
between a general requirement and a specific requirement, 
the specific requirement shall prevail. 


102.2 Existing Installations. Plumbing systems lawfully 
in existence at the time of the adoption of this code shall be 
permitted to have their use, maintenance, or repair continued 
where the use, maintenance, or repair is in accordance with 
the original design and location and no hazard to life, health, 
or property has been created by such plumbing system. 


102.3 Maintenance. The plumbing and drainage system, 
both existing and new, of a premise under the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction shall be maintained in a sanitary and safe 
operating condition. Devices or safeguards required by this 
code shall be maintained in accordance with the code edition 
under which installed. 


The owner or the owner's designated agent shall be 
responsible for maintenance of plumbing systems. To deter- 
mine compliance with this subsection, the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall be permitted to cause a plumbing system to 
be reinspected. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


102.4 Additions, Alterations, Renovations, or Repairs. 
Additions, alterations, renovations or repairs shall conform to 
that required for a new system without requiring the existing 
plumbing system to be in accordance with the requirements 
of this code. Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs 
shall not cause an existing system to become unsafe, insani- 
tary, or overloaded. 


Additions, alterations, renovations, or repairs to existing 
plumbing installations shall comply with the provisions for new 
construction unless such deviations are found to be necessary 
and are first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


102.4.1 Building Sewers and Drains. Existing 
building sewers and building drains shall be permitted to 
be used in connection with new buildings or new plumb- 
ing and drainage work where they are found on exami- 
nation and test to be in accordance with the requirements 
governing new work, and the proper Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall notify the owner to make changes nec- 
essary to be in accordance with this code. No building, or 
part thereof, shall be erected or placed over a part of a 
drainage system that is constructed of materials other 
than those approved elsewhere in this code for use under 
or within a building. 


102.4.2 Openings. Openings into a drainage or vent 
system, excepting those openings to which plumbing fix- 
tures are properly connected or which constitute vent ter- 
minals, shall be permanently plugged or capped in an 
approved manner, using the appropriate materials in 
accordance with this code. 


102.5 Health and Safety. Where compliance with the pro- 
visions of this code fails to eliminate or alleviate a nuisance, 
or other dangerous or insanitary condition that involves health 
or safety hazards, the owner or the owner's agent shall install 
such additional plumbing and drainage facilities or shall make 
such repairs or alterations as ordered by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

102.6 Changes in Building Occupancy. Plumbing sys- 
tems that are a part of a building or structure undergoing a 
change in use or occupancy, as defined in the building code, 
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code that 
are applicable to the new use or occupancy. 


102.7 Moved Structures. Parts of the plumbing system of 
a building or part thereof that is moved from one foundation 
to another, or from one location to another, shall be in accor- 
dance with the provisions of this code for new installations 
and completely tested as prescribed elsewhere in this section 
for new work, except that walls or floors need not be removed 
during such test where other equivalent means of inspection 
acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction are provided. 
102.8 Appendices. The provisions in the appendices are 
intended to supplement the requirements of this code and 
shall not be considered part of this code unless formally 
adopted as such. 


21 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


103.0 Duties and Powers of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


103.1 General. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be 
the Authority duly appointed to enforce this code. For such 
purposes, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the 
powers of a law enforcement officer. The Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall have the power to render interpretations of 
this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations sup- 
plemental to this code as deemed necessary in order to clar- 
ify the application of the provisions of this code. Such 
interpretations, rules, and regulations shall comply with the 
intent and purpose of this code. 


In accordance with the prescribed procedures and with 
the approval of the appointing authority, the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction shall be permitted to appoint a such number 
of technical officers, inspectors, and other employees as shall 
be authorized from time to time. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall be permitted to deputize such inspectors or 
employees as necessary to carry out the functions of the code 
enforcement agency. 


The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to 
request the assistance and cooperation of other officials of 
this jurisdiction so far as required in the discharge of the 
duties in accordance with this code or other pertinent law or 
ordinance. 


103.2 Liability. The Authority Having Jurisdiction charged 
with the enforcement of this code, acting in good faith and 
without malice in the discharge of the Authority Having Juris- 
diction's duties, shall not thereby be rendered personally 
liable for damage that accrues to persons or property as a 
result of an act or by reason of an act or omission in the dis- 
charge of duties. A suit brought against the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction or employee because of such act or omission per- 
formed in the enforcement of provisions of this code shall be 
defended by legal counsel provided by this jurisdiction until 
final termination of such proceedings. 


103.3 Applications and Permits. The Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall be permitted to require the submission of 
plans, specifications, drawings, and such other information 
in accordance with the Authority Having Jurisdiction, prior to 
the commencement of, and at a time during the progress of, 
work regulated by this code. 


The issuance of a permit upon construction documents 
shall not prevent the Authority Having Jurisdiction from 
thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said construc- 
tion documents or from preventing construction operations 
being carried on thereunder where in violation of this code or 
of other pertinent ordinance or from revoking a certificate of 
approval where issued in error. 

103.3.1 Licensing. Provision for licensing shall be 

determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

103.4 Right of Entry. Where it is necessary to make an 
inspection to enforce the provisions of this code, or where the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction has reasonable cause to believe 
that there exists in a building or upon premises a condition or 
violation of this code that makes the building or premises 
unsafe, insanitary, dangerous, or hazardous, the Authority 


22 


Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to enter the building 
or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the 
duties imposed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction by this 
code, provided that where such building or premises is occu- 
pied, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall present creden- 
tials to the occupant and request entry. Where such building 
or premises is unoccupied, the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or 
other person having charge or control of the building or prem- 
ises and request entry. Where entry is refused, the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction has recourse to every remedy provided 
by law to secure entry. 


Where the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have first 
obtained an inspection warrant or other remedy provided by 
law to secure entry, no owner, occupant, or person having 
charge, care or control of a building or premises shall fail or 
neglect, after a request is made as herein provided, to 
promptly permit entry herein by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction for the purpose of inspection and examination pur- 
suant to this code. 


104.0 Permits. 


104.1 Permits Required. It shall be unlawful for a person, 
firm, or corporation to make an installation, alteration, repair, 
replacement, or remodel a plumbing system regulated by this 
code except as permitted in Section 104.2, or to cause the 
same to be done without first obtaining a separate plumbing 
permit for each separate building or structure. 


104.2 Exempt Work. A permit shall not be required for the 
following: 


(1) The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste, or vent pipe, 
provided, however, that a trap, drainpipe, soil, waste, or 
vent pipe become defective, and it becomes necessary to 
remove and replace the same with new material, the same 
shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be 
procured and inspection made as provided in this code. 


(2) The clearing of stoppages, including the removal and 
reinstallation of water closets, or the repairing of leaks 
in pipes, valves, or fixtures, provided such repairs do not 
involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of 
valves, pipes, or fixtures. 


Exemption from the permit requirements of this code 
shall not be deemed to grant authorization for work to be done 
in violation of the provisions of the code or other laws or ordi- 
nances of this jurisdiction. 


104.3 Application for Permit. To obtain a permit, the 
applicant shall first file an application therefore in writing on 
a form furnished by the Authority Having Jurisdiction for that 
purpose. Such application shall: 

(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the per- 
mit for which application 1s made. 

(2) Describe the land upon which the proposed work is to be 
done by legal description, street address, or similar 
description that will readily identify and locate the pro- 
posed building or work. 

(3) Indicate the use or occupancy for which the proposed 
work is intended. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(4) 
(5) 


Be accompanied by construction documents in accor- 
dance with Section 104.3.1. 


Be signed by the permittee or the permittee’s authorized 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


accordance with the requirements of the code and other per- 
tinent laws and ordinances and that the fees specified in Sec- 
tion 104.5 have been paid, the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall issue a permit therefore to the applicant. 


agent. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be per- 
mitted to require evidence to indicate such authority. 


(6) Give such other data and information in accordance with 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


104.3.1 Construction Documents. Construction 
documents, engineering calculations, diagrams, and other 
data shall be submitted in two or more sets, or in a digi- 
tal format where permitted by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction, with each application for a permit. The 
construction documents, computations, and specifications 
shall be prepared by, and the plumbing designed by, a reg- 
istered design professional. Construction documents shall 
be drawn to scale with clarity to identify that the intended 
work to be performed is in accordance with the code. 


Exception: The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be 
permitted to waive the submission of construction docu- 
ments, calculations, or other data where the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction finds that the nature of the work 
applied for 1s such that reviewing of construction docu- 
ments is not necessary to obtain compliance with the 
code. 


104.3.2 Plan Review Fees. Where a plan or other data 
is required to be submitted in accordance with Section 
104.3.1, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of sub- 
mitting construction documents for review. 


The plan review fees for plumbing work shall be 
determined and adopted by this jurisdiction. 


The plan review fees specified in this subsection are 
separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 
104.5. 


Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to 
require additional review, a fee shall be charged at the 
rate shown in Table 104.5. 


104.3.3 Time Limitation of Application. Applica- 
tions for which no permit is issued within 180 days fol- 
lowing the date of application shall expire by limitation, 
plans and other data submitted for review thereafter, shall 
be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall be permitted to exceed the time for action by 
the applicant for a period not to exceed 180 days upon 
request by the applicant showing that circumstances 
beyond the control of the applicant have prevented the 
action from being taken. No application shall be 
extended more than once. In order to renew action on an 
application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit 
plans and pay a new plan review fee. 


104.4 Permit Issuance. The application, construction doc- 
uments, and other data filed by an applicant for a permit shall 
be reviewed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Such plans 
shall be permitted to be reviewed by other departments of this 
jurisdiction to verify compliance with applicable laws under 
their jurisdiction. Where the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
finds that the work described in an application for permit and 
the plans, specifications, and other data filed therewith are in 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


104.4.1 Approved Plans or Construction Docu- 
ments. Where the Authority Having Jurisdiction issues 
the permit where plans are required, the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction shall endorse in writing or stamp the con- 
struction documents “APPROVED.” Such approved 
construction documents shall not be changed, modified, 
or altered without authorization from the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, and the work shall be done in accor- 
dance with approved plans. 


The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permit- 
ted to issue a permit for the construction of a part of a 
plumbing system before the entire construction docu- 
ments for the whole system have been submitted or 
approved, provided adequate information and detailed 
statements have been filed in accordance with the perti- 
nent requirements of this code. The holder of such per- 
mit shall be permitted to proceed at the holder's risk 
without assurance that the permit for the entire building, 
structure, or plumbing system will be granted. 


104.4.2 Validity of Permit. The issuance of a permit or 
approval of construction documents shall not be con- 
strued to be a permit for, or an approval of, a violation of 
the provisions of this code or other ordinance of the juris- 
diction. No permit presuming to give authority to violate 
or cancel the provisions of this code shall be valid. 


The issuance of a permit based upon plans, specifi- 
cations, or other data shall not prevent the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction from thereafter requiring the correc- 
tion of errors in said plans, specifications, and other data 
or from preventing building operations being carried on 
thereunder where in violation of this code or of other 
ordinances of this jurisdiction. 


104.4.3 Expiration. A permit issued by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction under the provisions of this code 
shall expire by limitation and become null and void 
where the work authorized by such permit is not com- 
menced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or 
where the work authorized by such permit 1s suspended 
or abandoned at a time after the work is commenced for 
a period of 180 days. Before such work is recommenced, 
a new permit shall first be obtained to do so, and the fee, 
therefore, shall be one-half the amount required for a new 
permit for such work, provided no changes have been 
made or will be made in the original construction docu- 
ments for such work, and provided further that such sus- 
pensions or abandonment has not exceeded 1 year. 


104.4.3.1 Expiration. [BSC] On or after January 
1, 2019, every permit issued shall become invalid 
unless the work on the site authorized by such permit 
is commenced within 12 months after its issuance or 
if the work authorized on the site by such permit is 
suspended or abandoned for a period of 12 months 
after the time the work is commenced. The building 
official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more 
extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 


23 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


days each. The extension shall be requested in writ- 
ing and justifiable cause demonstrated. (See Health 
and Safety Code Section 18938.5 and 18938.6). 


104.4.4 Extensions. A permittee holding an unexpired 
permit shall be permitted to apply for an extension of the 
time within which work shall be permitted to commence 
under that permit where the permittee is unable to com- 
mence work within the time required by this section. The 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to 
extend the time for action by the permittee for a period 
not exceeding 180 days upon written request by the per- 
mittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of 
the permittee have prevented the action from being taken. 
No permit shall be extended more than once. In order to 
renew action on a permit after expiration, the permittee 
shall pay a new full permit fee. 


104.4.5 Suspension or Revocation. The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted, with written noti- 
fication, to suspend or revoke a permit issued under the 
provisions of this code where the permit is issued in error 
or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in 
violation of other ordinance or regulation of the juris- 
diction. 


104.4.6 Retention of Plans. One set of approved con- 
struction documents and computations shall be retained 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction until final approval 
of the work covered therein. 


One set of approved construction documents, com- 
putations, and manufacturer's installation instructions 
shall be returned to the applicant and said set shall be 
kept on the site of the building or work at times during 
which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 


104.5 Fees. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the 
provisions of this section and as set forth in the fee schedule, 
Table 104.5. The fees are to be determined and adopted by 
this jurisdiction. 
104.5.1 Work Commencing Before Permit 
Issuance. Where work for which a permit is required 
by this code has been commenced without first obtaining 
said permit, a special investigation shall be made before 
a permit is issued for such work. 


104.5.2 Investigation Fees. An investigation fee, in 
addition to the permit fee, shall be collected whether a 
permit is then or subsequently issued. The investigation 
fee shall be equal to the amount of the permit fee that is 
required by this code if a permit were to be issued. The 
payment of such investigation fee shall not exempt a per- 
son from compliance with other provisions of this code, 
nor from a penalty prescribed by law. 


104.5.3 Fee Refunds. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of a fee 
as follows: 

(1) The amount paid hereunder that was erroneously 
paid or collected. 

(2) Refunding of not more than a percentage, as deter- 
mined by this jurisdiction where no work has been 
done under a permit issued in accordance with this 
code. 


24 


The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall not author- 
ize the refunding of a fee paid except upon written appli- 
cation filed by the original permittee not to exceed 180 
days after the date of fee payment. 


105.0 Inspections and Testing. 


105.1 General. Plumbing systems for which a permit is 
required by this code shall be inspected by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

No plumbing system or portion thereof shall be covered, 
concealed, or put into use until inspected and approved as pre- 
scribed in this code. Neither the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed 
in the removal or replacement of material required to permit 
inspection. Plumbing systems regulated by this code shall not 
be connected to the water, the energy fuel supply, or the sewer 
system until authorized by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


105.2 Required Inspections. New plumbing work and 
such portions of existing systems as affected by new work, 
or changes, shall be inspected by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction to ensure compliance with the requirements of this 
code and to ensure that the installation and construction of 
the plumbing system are in accordance with approved plans. 
The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall make the following 
inspections and other such inspections as necessary. The per- 
mittee or the permittee’s authorized agent shall be responsi- 
ble for the scheduling of such inspections as follows: 


(1) The underground inspection shall be made after trenches 
or ditches are excavated and bedded, piping installed, and 
before backfill is put in place. 


(2) Rough-in inspection shall be made prior to the installa- 
tion of wall or ceiling membranes. 


(3) Final inspection shall be made upon completion of the 
installation. 


105.2.1 Uncovering. Where a drainage or plumbing 
system, building sewer, private sewage disposal system, 
or part thereof, which is installed, altered, or repaired, is 
covered or concealed before being inspected, tested, and 
approved as prescribed in this code, it shall be uncovered 
for inspection after notice to uncover the work has been 
issued to the responsible person by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


The requirements of this section shall not be con- 
sidered to prohibit the operation of plumbing installed to 
replace existing equipment or fixtures serving an occu- 
pied portion of the building in the event a request for 
inspection of such equipment or fixture has been filed 
with the Authority Having Jurisdiction not more than 72 
hours after such replacement work is completed, and 
before a portion of such plumbing system is concealed by 
a permanent portion of the building. 

105.2.1.1 Water Supply System. No water sup- 

ply system or portion thereof shall be covered or 

concealed until it first has been tested, inspected, and 
approved. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


105.2.1.2 Covering or Using. No plumbing or 
drainage system, building sewer, private sewer dis- 
posal system, or part thereof, shall be covered, con- 
cealed, or put into use until it has been tested, 
inspected, and accepted as prescribed in this code. 


105.2.2 Other Inspections. In addition to the inspec- 
tions required by this code, the Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall be permitted to require other inspections to 
ascertain compliance with the provisions of this code and 
other laws that are enforced by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


105.2.3 Inspection Requests. It shall be the duty of 
the person doing the work authorized by a permit to 
notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction that such work 
is ready for inspection. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall be permitted to require that a request for 
inspection be filed not less than 1 working day before 
such inspection is desired. Such request shall be permit- 
ted to be made in writing or by telephone, at the option 
of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


It shall be the duty of the person requesting inspec- 
tions in accordance with this code to provide access to 
and means for inspection of such work. 


105.2.4 Advance Notice. It shall be the duty of the 
person doing the work authorized by the permit to notify 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction, orally or in writing 
that said work is ready for inspection. Such notification 
shall be given not less than 24 hours before the work is 
to be inspected. 


105.2.5 Responsibility. It shall be the duty of the 
holder of a permit to make sure that the work will stand 
the test prescribed before giving the notification. 


The equipment, material, and labor necessary for 
inspection or tests shall be furnished by the person to 
whom the permit is issued or by whom inspection is 
requested. 


105.2.6 Reinspections. A reinspection fee shall be 
permitted to be assessed for each inspection or reinspec- 
tion where such portion of work for which inspection is 
called is not complete or where required corrections have 
not been made. 


This provision shall not be interpreted as requiring 
reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for fail- 
ure to be in accordance with the requirements of this 
code, but as controlling the practice of calling for inspec- 
tions before the job is ready for inspection or reinspec- 
tion. 


Reinspection fees shall be permitted to be assessed 
where the approved plans are not readily available to the 
inspector, for failure to provide access on the date for 
which the inspection is requested, or for deviating from 
plans requiring the approval of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 

To obtain reinspection, the applicant shall file an 
application therefore in writing upon a form furnished 


for that purpose and pay the reinspection fee in accor- 
dance with Table 104.5. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


In instances where reinspection fees have been 
assessed, no additional inspection of the work will be 
performed until the required fees have been paid. 


105.3 Testing of Systems. Plumbing systems shall be 
tested and approved in accordance with this code or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. Tests shall be conducted in 
the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction's duly appointed representa- 
tive. 


No test or inspection shall be required where a plumb- 
ing system, or part thereof, is set up for exhibition purposes 
and has no connection with a water or drainage system. In 
cases where it would be impractical to provide the required 
water or air tests, or for minor installations and repairs, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to make such 
inspection as deemed advisable in order to be assured that the 
work has been performed in accordance with the intent of this 
code. Joints and connections in the plumbing system shall be 
gastight and watertight for the pressures required by the test. 


105.3.1 Defective Systems. An air test shall be used 
in testing the sanitary condition ofthe drainage or plumb- 
ing system of building premises where there is reason to 
believe that it has become defective. In buildings or 
premises condemned by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion because of an insanitary condition of the plumbing 
system, or part thereof, the alterations in such system 
shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code. 


105.3.2 Retesting. Where the Authority Having Juris- 
diction finds that the work will not pass the test, neces- 
sary corrections shall be made, and the work shall be 
resubmitted for test or inspection. 


105.3.3 Approval. Where prescribed tests and inspec- 
tions indicate that the work is in accordance with this code, 
a certificate of approval shall be issued by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction to the permittee on demand. 


105.4 Connection to Service Utilities. No person shall 
make connections from a source of energy or fuel to a plumb- 
ing system or equipment regulated by this code and for which 
a permit is required until approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. No person shall make connection from a water- 
supply line nor shall connect to a sewer system regulated by 
this code and for which a permit 1s required until approved 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. The Authority Having 
Jurisdiction shall be permitted to authorize temporary con- 
nection of the plumbing equipment to the source of energy or 
fuel for the purpose of testing the equipment. 


106.0 Violations and Penalties. 


106.1 General. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm, or 
corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, 
improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, or maintain 
plumbing or permit the same to be done in violation of this 
code. 


106.2 Notices of Correction or Violation. Notices of 
correction or violation shall be written by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction and shall be permitted to be posted at the site 
of the work or mailed or delivered to the permittee or their 
authorized representative. 


25 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


Refusal, failure, or neglect to comply with such notice 
or order within 10 days of receipt thereof, shall be considered 
a violation of this code and shall be subject to the penalties set 
forth by the governing laws of the jurisdiction. 


106.3 Penalties. A person, firm, or corporation violating a 
provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misde- 
meanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by 
a fine, imprisonment, or both set forth by the governing laws 
of the jurisdiction. Each separate day or portion thereof, dur- 
ing which a violation of this code occurs or continues, shall 
be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 


106.4 Stop Orders. Where work is being done contrary to 
the provisions of this code, the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall be permitted to order the work stopped by notice in writ- 
ing served on persons engaged in the doing or causing such 
work to be done, and such persons shall forthwith stop work 
until authorized by the Authority Having Jurisdiction to pro- 
ceed with the work. 


106.5 Authority to Disconnect Utilities in Emergen- 
cies. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the 
authority to disconnect a plumbing system to a building, 
structure, or equipment regulated by this code in case of 
emergency where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard 
to life or property. 

106.6 Authority to Condemn. Where the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction ascertains that a plumbing system or portion 
thereof, regulated by this code, has become hazardous to life, 
health, or property, or has become insanitary, the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall order in writing that such plumbing 
either be removed or placed in a safe or sanitary condition. 
The order shall fix a reasonable time limit for compliance. 
No person shall use or maintain defective plumbing after 
receiving such notice. 


Where such plumbing system is to be disconnected, writ- 
ten notice shall be given. In cases of immediate danger to life 
or property, such disconnection shall be permitted to be made 
immediately without such notice. 


107.0 Board of Appeals. 


107.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, 
decisions, or determinations made by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction relative to the application and interpretations of 
this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of 
Appeals consisting of members who are qualified by experi- 
ence and training to pass upon matters pertaining to plumb- 
ing design, construction, and maintenance and the public 
health aspects of plumbing systems and who are not employ- 
ees of the jurisdiction. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary to 
said board but shall have no vote upon a matter before the 
board. The Board of Appeals shall be appointed by the gov- 
erning body and shall hold office at its pleasure. The board 
shall adopt rules of procedure for conducting its business and 
shall render decisions and findings in writing to the appellant 
with a duplicate copy to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


26 


107.2 Limitations of Authority. The Board of Appeals 
shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the admin- 
istrative provisions of this code, nor shall the board be 
empowered to waive requirements of this code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DIVISION II SCOPE AND ADMINISTRATION 


TABLE 104.5 
PLUMBING PERMIT FEES 


Permit Issuance 
I -For issuing აისი ა-აალლის””””'""""""სს"''"'""'""" deed * 
2. For წ უუყყეIი-პოინყიე!ს ს სი თლდვვღვ---------იი.._- __-  _–_--_- * 


Unit Fee Schedule (in addition to Item 1 and Item 2 above) 
1. For each plumbing fixture on one trap or a set of fixtures on one trap (including water, 


drainage piping, and backflow protection therefore) ................. esses enne -_-_ * 
2. For each building sewer and each trailer park sewer .................. esses eere სა 
3. Rainwater systems — per drain (inside ს ლ–_უაუ_ლდ-ლ_ა--_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_-_- * 
4. For each cesspool (where permitted) ———-—-——————————— ы. * 
5. For each private sewage ოსა ა.·აXI „–––>>>»..---___-__-_-__-_-_-_-_-___ * 
6. For each water heater, vent, or both ...................................ааа анааан ааа * 
7. For each gas piping system of опе to five оџіеќѕ.............................. а.е * 
8. For each additional gas piping system outlet, per онйеї............... нинин ны нынын нөө 2 
9. Foreach industrial waste pretreatment interceptor, including its trap and vent, 
except kitchen-type grease interceptors functioning as fixture პს „ლლოძ”ძ”თ0/იი“”ჟჰ" = 
10. For each installation, alteration, or repair of water piping, water treating equipment, or both ............................... გ 
11. For each repair or alteration of drainage or vent piping, each fixture... ш 
12. For each lawn sprinkler system on one meter including backflow protection devices therefore ............................ ს 
13. For atmospheric-type vacuum breakers not referenced in Item 12: 
უეუეუი_____ჰ_-_-__-_ჰ_ძ_-_______-_-____-_3---_- ს 
Over ә; eaclt CREER თ”"'""'"")!ს!"'”” e eO ee E e EIU BASLE Bos e OL Tee dd * 


14. For each backflow protective device other than atmospheric-type vacuum breakers: 
Two inches (50 mm) in diameter and smaller .... 


Over2 inches (5 Отт) in. diameter... cs e e etre n e o elt od D ee gite et taedia 
I5. For-each gray water system... enne eH live “”” У 
16. For initial installation and testing of a reclaimed water system ................. eese enne Ы 
17. For each annual cross-connection testing of a reclaimed water system (excluding initial test) .............................. * 
18. For each medical gas piping system serving one to five inlet(s)/outlet(s) for a specific раз................................... * 


19. For each additional medical gas inlet(s)/outlet(s) 


Other Inspections and Fees 
1. Inspections outside of normal business hours... eene enne nne nnne нынын ыны + 
Кеш^ресиоп@@ ынкы one em Bee este estem а 


2 
3. Inspections for which no fee is specifically indicated 
4 


Additional plan review required by changes, additions, or 
revisions to approved plans (minimum charge — # hour).............. sese nete nennen nenne * 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


* Jurisdiction will indicate their fees here 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 27 


28 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 2 - DEFINITIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC SS | SS/CC 172 13 4 
Adopt Entire Chapter X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X ХХ X X XXIX 
sections listed below) 
ЕЩЕ. 3HE 
Chapter/Section 
203.0 X XIX 
204.0 XIX 
205.0 X X X X 
206.0 X XIXI X X 
207.0 x | X XX X 
208.0 X 
209.0 X X 
210.0 Ххх 
211.0 X X 
214.0 XIX 
215.0 X X 
216.0 X XIX 
217.0 X X 
218.0 X X 
220.0 X X X 
221.0 X X Ххх 
222.0 X X Ххх 
223.0 X X 
225.0 X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal 5 adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


29 


30 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 2 
DEFINITIONS 


201.0 General. 


201.1 Applicability. For the purpose of this code, the fol- 
lowing terms have the meanings indicated in this chapter. 


No attempt is made to define ordinary words, which are 
used in accordance with their established dictionary mean- 
ings, except where a word has been used loosely, and it is 
necessary to define its meaning as used in this code to avoid 
misunderstanding. 


202.0 Definition of Terms. 


202.1 General. The definitions of terms are arranged alpha- 
betically according to the first word of the term. 


203.0 -A- 
ABS. Acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene. 


Accepted Engineering Practice. That which conforms 
to technical or scientific-based principles, tests, or standards 
that are accepted by the engineering profession. 


Accessible. Where applied to a fixture, connection, appli- 
ance, or equipment, “accessible” means having access 
thereto, but which first may require the removal of an access 
panel, door, or similar obstruction. 


Accessible, Readily. Having a direct access without the 
necessity of removing a panel, door, or similar obstruction. 


Accessory Dwelling Unit. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] An 
attached or detached residential dwelling unit that provides 
complete independent living facilities for one or more per- 
sons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing pri- 
mary residence. Accessory dwelling units shall include 
permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, 
and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or mul- 
tifamily dwelling is or will be situated. (See Government Code 
Section 65852.2.) 


Air Break. A physical separation which may be a low inlet 
into the indirect waste receptor from the fixture, appliance, 
or device indirectly connected. 

Air Gap, Drainage. The unobstructed vertical distance 
through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from 
a pipe, plumbing fixture, appliance, or appurtenance convey- 
ing waste to the flood-level rim of the receptor. 

Air Gap, Water Distribution. The unobstructed vertical 
distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest 
opening from a pipe or faucet conveying potable water to the 
flood-level rim of a tank, vat, or fixture. 

Alternate Water Source. Nonpotable source of water that 
includes but not limited to gray water, on-site treated non- 
potable water, on-site treated nonpotable gray water, rain- 
water, and reclaimed (recycled) water. 

Anchors. See Supports. 


Anodeless Riser. An assembly of steel-cased plastic pipe 
used to make the transition between plastic piping installed 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


underground and metallic piping installed aboveground. 
[NFPA 54:3.3.3] 


Appliance. A device that utilizes fuel or electricity as an 
energy source to produce light, heat, power, refrigeration, or 
air conditioning. This definition also includes vented decora- 
tive appliances and electric storage or tankless water heaters. 


Appliance, Low-Heat. A fuel-burning appliance that 
produces a continuous flue gas temperature, at the point 
of entrance to the flue, of not more than 1000?F (538°C). 


Appliance, Medium-Heat. A fuel-burning appliance 
that produces a continuous flue gas temperature, at the 


point of entrance to the flue, of more than 1000°F 
(538°C) and less than 2000°F (1093°С). 


Appliance Categorized Vent Diameter/Area. The min- 
imum vent diameter/area permissible for Category I appli- 
ances to maintain a nonpositive vent static pressure when 
tested in accordance with nationally recognized standards. 
[NFPA 54:3.3.5] 


Appliance Fuel Connector. An assembly of listed semi- 
rigid or flexible tubing and fittings to carry fuel between a 
fuel-piping outlet and a fuel-burning appliance. 
Approved. Acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Exception: [HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Approved" means meeting 
the approval of the Enforcing Agency, except as otherwise pro- 
vided by law, when used in connection with any system, mate- 
rial, type of construction, fixture or appliance as the result of 
investigations and tests conducted by the agency, or by rea- 
son of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, or 
technical, health, or scientific organizations or agencies. 

Notes: 

1. See Health and Safety Code Section 17920 for 
"Approved" as applied to residential construction and 
buildings or structures accessory thereto as referenced 
in Section 1.6.2. 

2. See Health and Safety Code Section 17921.1 for 
“Approved” as applied to the use of the hotplates in res- 
idential construction as referenced in Section 1.8.2. 

3. See Health and Safety Code 19966 for "Approved" as 
applied to Factory-Built Housing as referenced in Sec- 
tion 1.6.3.2.5. 

4. See Health and Safety Code Section 18201 for 
"Approved" as applied to Mobilehome Parks as refer- 
enced in Section 1.8.2. 

5. See Health and Safety Code Section 18862.1 for 
“Approved” as applied to Special Occupancy Parks as 
referenced in Section 1.8.2. 

Approved Testing Agency. An organization primarily 

established for purposes of testing to approved standards and 

approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

[HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Approved Testing Agency" is any 

agency which is determined by the enforcing agency, except 


31 


DEFINITIONS 


as otherwise provided by statute, to have adequate personnel 
and expertise to carry out the testing of systems, materials, 
and construction fixtures or appliances. 


Area Drain. A receptor designed to collect surface or storm 
water from an open area. 


Aspirator. A fitting or device supplied with water or other 
fluid under positive pressure that passes through an integral 
orifice or constriction, causing a vacuum. 


Authority Having Jurisdiction. The organization, office, 
or individual responsible for enforcing the requirements of a 
code or standard, or for approving equipment, materials, 
installations, or procedures. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall be a federal, state, local, or other regional depart- 
ment or an individual such as a plumbing official, mechanical 
official, labor department official, health department official, 
building official, or others having statutory authority. In the 
absence of statutory authority, the Authority Having Juris- 
diction may be some other responsible party. This definition 
shall include the Authority Having Jurisdiction's duly author- 
ized representative. 

[HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Authority Having Jurisdiction" shall 
mean “Enforcing Agency” as defined in Section 207.0 of this 
code. 


204.0 -B- 

Backflow. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or 
substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of 
water from sources other than its intended source. See Back- 
pressure Backflow and Backsiphonage. 

Backflow Connection. An arrangement whereby backflow 
can occur. 

Backflow Preventer. A backflow prevention device, an 
assembly, or another method to prevent backflow into the 
potable water system. 

Backpressure Backflow. Backflow due to an increased 
pressure above the supply pressure, which may be due to 
pumps, boilers, gravity, or other sources of pressure. 
Backsiphonage. The flowing back of used, contaminated, 
or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or vessel into a 
water supply pipe due to a pressure less than atmospheric in 
such pipe. See Backflow. 

Backwater Valve. A device installed in a drainage system 
to prevent reverse flow. 

Bathroom. A room equipped with a shower, bathtub, or 
combination bath/shower. 

Bathroom, Half. A room equipped with only a water closet 
and lavatory. 

Bathroom Group. Any combination of fixtures, not to 
exceed one water closet, two lavatories, either one bathtub or 
one combination bath/shower, and one shower, and may 
include a bidet and an emergency floor drain. 

Battery of Fixtures. A group of two or more similar, adja- 
cent fixtures that discharge into a common horizontal waste 
or soil branch. 


Bedpan Steamer. A fixture that is used to sterilize bedpans 
by way of steam. 


32 


Body Spray. A shower device for spraying water onto a 
bather from other than the overhead position. 


Boiler Blowoff. An outlet on a boiler to permit emptying or 
discharge of sediment. 


Bonding Jumper. A reliable conductor to ensure the | 
required electrical conductivity between metal parts required 
to be electrically connected. [NFPA 70:100 (Part I)] 


Bottle Filling Station. A plumbing fixture connected to the 
potable water distribution system and sanitary drainage sys- 
tem that is designed and intended for filling personal use 
drinking water bottles or containers not less than 10 inches 
(254 mm) in height. Such fixtures can be separate from or 
integral to a drinking fountain and can incorporate a water fil- 
ter and a cooling system for chilling the drinking water. 


Branch. A part of the piping system other than a main, riser, 
or stack. 


Branch, Fixture. See Fixture Branch. 
Branch, Horizontal. See Horizontal Branch. 


Branch Vent. A vent connecting one or more individual 

vents with a vent stack or stack vent. 

Building. A structure built, erected, and framed of compo- 

nent structural parts designed for the housing, shelter, enclo- 

sure, or support of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 

Exceptions: [HCD 1 & HCD 2] “BUILDING” shall not 

include the following: 

I. Any mobilehome as defined in Health and Safety Code 
Section 18008. 

2. Any manufactured home as defined in Health and Safety 
Code Section 18007. 

3. Any commercial modular as defined in Health and Safety 
Code Section 18001.8 or any special purpose commer- 
cial modular as defined in Section 18012.5. 

4. Апу recreational vehicle as defined in Health and Safety 
Code Section 18010. 

5. Апу multifamily manufactured home as defined in Health 
and Safety Code Section 18008. 7. 
For additional information, see Health and Safety Code 

Section 18908. 

Building Drain. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage 

system that receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other 

drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it 

to the building sewer beginning 2 feet (610 mm) outside the 

building wall. 

Building Drain (Sanitary). A building drain that conveys 

sewage only. 

Building Drain (Storm). A building drain that conveys 

storm water or another drainage, but no sewage. 

Building Sewer. That part of the horizontal piping of a 

drainage system that extends from the end of the building 

drain and that receives the discharge of the building drain and 

conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer, private sewage 

disposal system, or another point of disposal. 

Building Sewer (Combined). A building sewer that con- 

veys both sewage and storm water or other drainage. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Building Sewer (Sanitary). A building sewer that conveys 
sewage only. 

Building Sewer (Storm). A building sewer that conveys 
storm water or another drainage, but no sewage. 


Building Subdrain. That portion of a drainage system that 
does not drain by gravity into the building sewer. 


Building Supply. The pipe is carrying potable water from 
the water meter or another source of water supply to a build- 
ing or other point of use or distribution on the lot. 


205.0 -C- 


Category 1. Activities, systems, or equipment whose fail- 
ure is likely to cause major injury or death to patients, staff, 
or visitors. [NFPA 99:3.3.162.1] 


Category 2. Activities, systems, or equipment whose failure 
is likely to cause minor injury to patients, staff, or visitors. 
[NFPA 99:3.3.162.2] 


Category 3. Activities, systems, or equipment whose failure 
is not likely to cause injury to patients, staff, or visitors, but 
can cause discomfort. [NFPA 99:3.3.162.3] 


Category 3 Vacuum System. A Category 3 vacuum dis- 
tribution system that can be either a wet system designed to 
remove liquids, air-gas, or solids from the treated area; or a 
dry system designed to trap liquid and solids before the serv- 
ice inlet and to accommodate air-gas only through the serv- 
ice inlet. [NFPA 99:3.3.20] 


Category 4. Activities, systems, or equipment whose failure 
would have no impact on patient care. [NFPA 99:3.3.162.4] 


Certified Backflow Assembly Tester. A person who has 
shown competence to test and maintain backflow assemblies 
to the satisfaction of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Cesspool. A lined excavation in the ground that receives 
the discharge of a drainage system or part thereof, so designed 
as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein 
but permitting the liquids to seep through the bottom and 
sides. 


Chemical Waste. See Special Wastes. 


Chimney. One or more passageways, vertical or nearly so, for 
conveying flue or vent gases to the outdoors. [NFPA 54:3.3.17] 


Chimney, Factory-Built. A chimney composed of 
listed factory-built components assembled in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions to form 
the completed chimney. [NFPA 54:3.3.17.2] 


Chimney, Masonry. A field-constructed chimney of 
solid masonry units, bricks, stones, listed masonry chim- 
ney units, or reinforced Portland cement concrete, lined 
with suitable chimney flue liners. [NFPA 54:3.3.17.3] 
Chimney, Metal. A field-constructed chimney of metal. 
[NFPA 54:3.3.18.4] 
Chimney Classifications: 

Chimney, High-Heat Appliance-Type. A factory- 
built, masonry, or metal chimney suitable for removing 
the products of combustion from fuel-burning high-heat 


appliances producing combustion gases in excess of 
2000°F (1093°C), measured at the appliance flue outlet. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


Chimney, Low-Heat Appliance-Type. A factory- 
built, masonry, or metal chimney suitable for removing 
the products of combustion from fuel-burning low-heat 
appliances producing combustion gases not in excess of 
1000°F (538°C) under normal operating conditions, but 
capable of producing combustion gases of 1400°F (760°C) 
during intermittent forced firing for periods up to one hour. 
Temperatures are measured at the appliance flue outlet. 


Chimney, Medium-Heat Appliance-Type. A fac- 
tory-built, masonry, or metal chimney suitable for 
removing the products of combustion from fuel-burning 
medium-heat appliances producing combustion gases, 
not in excess of 2000°F (1093°C), measured at the appli- 
ance flue outlet. 


Chimney, Residential Appliance-Type. A factory- 
built or masonry chimney suitable for removing products 
of combustion from residential-type appliances produc- 
ing combustion gases, not in excess of 1000°F (538°C), 
measured at the appliance flue outlet. Factory-built Type 
HT chimneys have high-temperature thermal shock 
resistance. 


Circuit Vent. The vent that connects to a horizontal drainage 
branch and vents two traps to a maximum of eight traps con- 
nected into a battery of fixtures. 


Clarifier. See Interceptor (Clarifier). 


Clear Water Waste. Cooling water and condensate drainage 
from refrigeration and air-conditioning equipment; cooled 
condensate from steam heating systems, and cooled boiler 
blowdown water. 


Clinical Sink. A fixture that has the same flushing and 
cleansing characteristics of a water closet that is used to 
receive the wastes from a bedpan. Also, known as a bedpan 
washer. 


Clothes Washer System. [HCD 1] A gray water system 
utilizing only a single domestic clothes washing machine in a 
one- or two-family dwelling. 

Coastal High Hazard Areas. An area within the flood 
hazard area that is subject to high-velocity wave action, and 
shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map or other flood hazard 
map as Zone V, VO, VE or V1-30. 


Code. A standard that is an extensive compilation of provi- 
sions covering broad subject matter or that is suitable for 
adoption into law independently of other codes and standards. 


Combination Temperature and Pressure-Relief 
Valve. A relief valve that actuates when a set temperature, 
pressure, or both is reached. Also, known as a T&P Valve. 


Combination Thermostatic/Pressure Balancing 
Valve. A mixing valve that senses outlet temperature and 
incoming hot and cold water pressure and compensates for 
fluctuations in incoming hot and cold water temperatures, 
pressures, or both to stabilize outlet temperatures. 


Combination Waste and Vent System. A specially 
designed system of waste piping embodying the horizontal 
wet venting of one or more sinks or floor drains using a com- 
mon waste and vent pipe adequately sized to provide free 
movement of air above the flow line of the drain. 


33 


DEFINITIONS 


Combined Building Sewer. See Building Sewer (Com- 
bined). 

Combustible Material. A material that, in the form in 
which it is used and under the conditions anticipated, will 


ignite and burn; a material that does not meet the definition of 
noncombustible. [NFPA 54:3.3.64.1] 


Commercial Modular System. A drinking water treat- 
ment unit system consisting of multiple components attached 
to a manifold, produced specifically for food service appli- 
cations, and not intended for use in residential applications. 


Commissaries Serving Mobile Food Preparation 
Units. [DPH] A food establishment in which food, contain- 
ers, equipment or supplies are stored or handled for use in 
vehicles, mobile food preparation units, food carts or vending 
machines. 


Common. That part of a plumbing system that is so 
designed and installed as to serve more than one appliance, 
fixture, building, or system. 

Complex System. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Gray water sys- 
tems that discharge over 250 gallons (947 L) per day. 
Condensate. The liquid phase produced by condensation 
of a gas or vapor. 


Conductor. A pipe inside the building that conveys storm 
water from the roof to a storm drain, combined building 
sewer, or other approved point of disposal. 


Confined Space. A space with limited entrance and egress 
that is not suitable for inhabitants and not intended for con- 
tinuous human occupancy. 


Construction Documents. Plans, specifications, written, 
graphic, and pictorial documents prepared or assembled for 
describing the design, location, and physical characteristics 
of the elements of a project necessary for obtaining a permit. 


Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the 
potable water that creates an actual hazard to the public health 
through poisoning or the spread of disease by sewage, indus- 
trial fluids, or waste. Also, defined as High Hazard. 
Continuous Vent. A vertical vent that is a continuation of 
the drain to which it connects. 

Continuous Waste. A drain is connecting the compart- 
ments of a set of fixtures to a trap or connecting other per- 
mitted fixtures to a common trap. 

Copper Alloy. A homogenous mixture of two or more met- 
als in which copper is the primary component, such as brass 
and bronze. 

Covered Multifamily Dwellings. [HCD 1-AC] See Sec- 
tion 1.8.2.1.2. 

CPVC. Chlorinated Polyvinyl Chloride. 

Critical Care Area. See Patient Care Space, Category 1. 
Critical Level. The critical level (C-L or C/L) marking on a 
backflow prevention device or vacuum breaker is a point con- 
forming to approved standards and established by the testing 
laboratory (usually stamped on the device by the manufac- 
turer) that determines the minimum elevation above the flood- 
level rim of the fixture or receptor served at which the device 


34 


may be installed. Where a backflow prevention device does 
not bear a critical level marking, the bottom of the vacuum 
breaker, combination valve, or the bottom of such approved 
device shall constitute the critical level. 


Cross-Connection. A connection or arrangement, physical 
or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and a 
plumbing fixture or a tank, receptor, equipment, or device, 
through which it may be possible for nonpotable, used, 
unclean, polluted, and contaminated water, or other sub- 
stances to enter into a part of such potable water system under 
any condition. 


206.0 -D- 


Dead Leg. A section of potable water pipe which contains 
water that has no flow or does not circulate. 


Debris Excluder. A device installed on the rainwater catch- 
ment conveyance system to prevent the accumulation of 
leaves, needles, or other debris in the system. 


Department. [HCD 1, HCD 2 & HCD 1-AC] "Depart- 
ment" means the Department of Housing and Community 
Development. 


Department Having Jurisdiction. The Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, including any other law enforcement agency 
affected by a provision of this code, whether such agency is 
specifically named or not. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Department Having Jurisdiction " shall 
mean "Enforcing Agency" as defined in Section 207.0 of this 
code. 

Design Flood Elevation. The elevation of the “design 
flood,” including wave height, relative to the datum specified 
on the community's legally designated flood hazard map. In 
areas designated as Zone AO, the design flood elevation is 
the elevation of the highest existing grade of the building's 
perimeter plus the depth number (in feet) specified on the 
flood hazard map. In areas designated as Zone AO where a 
depth number is not specified on the map, the depth number 
is taken as being equal to 2 feet (610 mm). 

Developed Length. The length along the centerline of a 
pipe and fittings. 

Diameter. Unless specifically stated, “diameter” is the nom- 
inal diameter as designated commercially. 

Direct-Vent Appliances. Appliances that are constructed 
and installed so that all air for combustion is derived directly 
from the outdoors and all flue gases are discharged to the out- 
doors. [NFPA 54:3.3.4.2] 

Disinfected Tertiary Recycled Water. [DWR] Filtered 
and subsequently disinfected wastewater that meets the 
approved method of treatment and minimum level of water 
quality specified in California Code of Regulations, Title 22, 
Division 4, Chapter 3 for the purpose of direct beneficial use. 
Disposal Field. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] An intended desti- 
nation for gray water, including but not limited to, a mulch 
basin or receiving landscape feature, gray water leach field, 
or other approved method of disposal. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Domestic Sewage. The liquid and water-borne wastes 
derived from the ordinary living processes, free from indus- 
trial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory 
disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or 
by means of a private sewage disposal system. 


Downspout. The rain leader from the roof to the building 
storm drain, combined building sewer, or other means of dis- 
posal located outside of the building. See Conductor and 
Leader. 


Drain. A pipe that carries waste or waterborne wastes in a 
building drainage system. 


Drainage System. Includes all the piping within public or 
private premises that conveys sewage, storm water, or other 
liquid wastes to a legal point of disposal, but does not include 
the mains of a public sewer system or a public sewage treat- 
ment or disposal plant. 


Drinking Fountain. A plumbing fixture connected to the 
potable water distribution system and sanitary drainage sys- 
tem that provides drinking water in a flowing stream so that 
the user can consume water directly from the fixture without 
the use of accessories. Drinking fountains should also incor- 
porate a bottle filling station and can incorporate a water fil- 
ter and a cooling system for chilling the drinking water. 


Dry Vent. A vent that does not receive the discharge of any 
sewage or waste. 


Durham System. Soil or waste system in which all piping is 
threaded pipe, tubing, or other such rigid construction, using 
recessed drainage fittings to correspond to the types of piping. 


207.0 -E- 


Effective Ground-Fault Current Path. An intentionally 
constructed, low impedance electrically conductive path 
designed and intended to carry current under ground-fault 
conditions from the point of a ground fault on a wiring sys- 
tem to the electrical supply source and that facilitates the 
operation of the overcurrent protective device or ground-fault 
detectors. [NFPA 70:100] 


Effective Opening. The minimum cross-sectional area at 
the point of water supply discharge measured or expressed in 
terms of (1) diameter of a circle or (2) where the opening is 
not circular, the diameter of a circle of equivalent cross-sec- 
tional area. (This applies to an air gap). 

Emergency Floor Drain. A floor drain that does not 
receive discharge from any fixture drain or indirect waste 
pipe, and serves to protect from damage where accidental 
spills, leaks or fixture backups occur. 

Enforcing Agency. [BSC, BSC-CG, HCD 1, HCD 2 & 
HCD 1-AC] “Enforcing Agency” is the designated depart- 
ment or agency as specified by statute or regulation. 
Essentially Nontoxic Transfer Fluid. A fluid generally 
recognized as safe by the Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) as food grade. 

Exam Room Sink. A sink used in the patient exam room of 
a medical or dental office with a primary purpose of the wash- 
ing of hands. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


Excess Flow Valve (EFV). A valve designed to activate 
when the fuel gas passing through it exceeds a prescribed 
flow rate. [NFPA 54:3.3.98.3] 

Existing Work. A plumbing system or any part thereof that 
has been installed prior to the effective date of this code. 
Expansion Joint. A fitting or arrangement of pipe and fit- 
tings that permit the contraction and expansion of a piping 
system. 

Expansion Tank. A vessel used to protect potable water 
systems from excessive pressure. 


208.0 -F- 

F Rating. The time period that the penetration firestop sys- 

tem limits the spread of fire through the penetration, where 

tested in accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479. 

Fixture Branch. A water supply pipe between the fixture 

supply pipe and the water distribution pipe. 

Fixture Drain. The drain from the trap of a fixture to the 

junction of that drain with any other drainpipe. 

Fixture Fitting. A device that controls and guides the flow 

of water. 

Fixture Supply. A water supply pipe is connecting the fix- 

ture with the fixture branch. 

Fixture Unit. A quantity in terms of which the load-produc- 

ing effects on the plumbing system of different kinds of plumb- 

ing fixtures are expressed on some arbitrarily chosen scale. 

Flammable Vapor or Fumes. The concentration of flam- 

mable constituents in the air that exceeds 25 percent of its 

lower flammability limit (LFL). 

Flood Hazard Area. The greater of the following two areas: 

(1) The area within a floodplain subject to a 1 percent or 
greater chance of flooding in any given year. 

(2) The area designated as a flood hazard area on a commu- 
nity’s flood hazard map, or otherwise legally designated. 

Flood Level. See Flooded. 

Flood-Level Rim. The top edge of a receptor or fixture from 

which water overflows. 

Flooded. A fixture is flooded where the liquid therein rises 

to the flood-level rim. 

Flue Collar. That portion of an appliance designed for the 

attachment of a draft hood, vent connector, or venting sys- 

tem. [NFPA 54:3.3.44] 

Flush Tank. A tank located above or integral with water 

closets, urinals, or similar fixtures for the purpose of flushing 

the usable portion of the fixture. 

Flush Valve. A valve located at the bottom of a tank for 

flushing water closets and similar fixtures. 

Flushometer Tank. A tank integrated within an air accu- 

mulator vessel that is designed to discharge a predetermined 

quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes. 

Flushometer Valve. A valve that discharges a predeter- 

mined quantity of water to fixtures for flushing purposes and 

is actuated by direct water pressure. 


35 


DEFINITIONS 


FOG Disposal System. A grease interceptor that reduces 
nonpetroleum fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in the effluent by 
separation, mass, and volume reduction. 

Food Establishment. [DPH] Any room, building, place or 
portion thereof, maintained, used or operated for purpose of 
storing, preparing, serving, packaging, transporting, sal- 
vaging or otherwise handling food at the retail level. 

Fuel Gas. Natural, manufactured liquefied petroleum, or a 
mixture of these. 


209.0 -G- 

Gang or Group Shower. Two or more showers in a com- 
mon area. 

Gas Piping. An installation of pipe, valves, or fittings that 
are used to convey fuel gas, installed on a premise or in a 


| building. 
=p 


Gas Piping System. An arrangement of gas piping or reg- 
ulators after the point of delivery and each arrangement of 
gas piping serving a building, structure, or premises, whether 
individually metered or not. 


General Anesthesia and Levels of Sedation/Analge- 
sia. 


Deep Sedation/Analgesia. A drug-induced depres- 
sion of consciousness during which patients cannot be 
easily aroused but respond purposefully following 
repeated or painful stimulation. The ability to independ- 
ently maintain ventilatory function may be impaired. 
Patients may require assistance in maintaining a patent 
airway, and spontaneous ventilation may be inadequate. 
Cardiovascular function is usually maintained. [NFPA 
99:3.3.68.2] 


General Anesthesia. A drug-induced loss of con- 
sciousness during which patients are not arousable, even 
by painful stimulation. The ability to independently 
maintain ventilatory function is often impaired. Patients 
often require assistance in maintaining a patent airway, 
and positive pressure ventilation may be required 
because of depressed spontaneous ventilation or drug- 
induced depression of neuromuscular function. Cardio- 
vascular function may be impaired. [NFPA 99:3.3.68.1] 


Minimal Sedation (Anxiolysis). A drug-induced 
state during which patients respond normally to verbal 
commands. Although cognitive function and coordina- 
tion may be impaired, ventilatory and cardiovascular 
functions are unaffected. [NFPA 99:3.3.68.4] 


Moderate Sedation/Analgesia (Conscious Seda- 
tion). A drug-induced depression of consciousness dur- 
ing which patients respond purposefully to verbal 
commands, either alone or accompanied by light tactile 
stimulation. No interventions are required to maintain a 
patient airway, and spontaneous ventilation is adequate. 
Cardiovascular function is usually maintained. [NFPA 
99:3.3.68.3] 


36 


Grade. The slope or fall of a line of pipe in reference to a 
horizontal plane. In drainage, it is usually expressed as the 
fall in a fraction of an inch (mm) or percentage slope per foot 
(meter) length of pipe. 

Gravity Grease Interceptor. A plumbing appurtenance or 
appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to 
intercept nonpetroleum fats, oils, and greases (FOG) from a 
wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, 30 minute 
retention time, baffle(s), not less than two compartments, a 
total volume of not less than 300 gallons (1135 L), and grav- 
ity separation. [These interceptors comply with the require- 
ments of Chapter 10 or are designed by a registered design 
professional.] Gravity grease interceptors are generally 
installed outside. 


Graywater. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Pursuant to Health and 
Safety Code Section 17922.12, “graywater” means untreated 
wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet dis- 
charge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or 
unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from 
contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or 
operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, 
wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, 
clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not 
include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. 


<— 


Note: For the purpose of applying the standards contained 
in this code, “Graywater” as defined above, has the same 
meaning as “gray water", "grey water”, and “greywater”. 


Gray Water System. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] A system 
designed to collect gray water on-site for reuse or distribution 
to an irrigation or disposal field. A gray water system may 
include, on-site treated nonpotable water devices or equip- 
ment, tanks, valves, filters, pumps or other appurtenances 
along with piping and receiving landscape. 

Grease Interceptor. A plumbing appurtenance or appli- 
ance that 1s installed in a sanitary drainage system to inter- 
cept nonpetroleum fats, oil, and greases (FOG) from a 
wastewater discharge. 

Grease Removal Device (GRD). A hydromechanical 
grease interceptor that automatically, mechanically removes 
non-petroleum fats, oils and grease (FOG) from the intercep- 
tor, the control of which are either automatic or manually ini- 
tiated. 

Grounding Electrode. A conducting object through which 
a direct connection to earth is established. [NFPA 70:100 
(Part I)] 

Groundwater. Water that exists beneath the earth's surface. | 
Group Wash Fixture. A lavatory that allows more than one 
person to utilize the fixture at the same time. The fixture has 
one or more drains and one or more faucets. 


210.0 -H- 


Handwashing Fixture. [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6] Hand- || 
washing fixtures consist of faucet, trim and lavatory as 
described: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) Faucets and Trim 


a. Handwashing fixtures used by medical and nursing 
staff, patients, and food handlers shall have fittings 
such that all controls can be operated without the 
use of hands. 

i Wrist or elbow blades shall be permitted unless 
otherwise noted in Table 4-2. 


ii. Blade handles used for this purpose shall be at 
least 4 inches (102 mm) in length. 

b. Sensor operated fixtures shall be capable of func- 
tioning during loss of normal power. 

c. Faucets shall not be equipped with an aerator but 
may be equipped with a non-aerating laminar flow 
device. The flow rate for handwashing fixtures shall 
not be less than 1.0 (3.79 L) gallons per minute. 

d. Faucets shall be equipped with gooseneck spouts. A 
gooseneck spout shall be deck or fixture-mounted so 
the discharge point of the spout return is at least 10 
inches (25.4 mm) above the bottom of the basin. The 
water shall not flow directly from the spout into the 
drain. The gooseneck spout shall have a 180(+/-10) 
degree return with a constant radius and the outlet 
pointing vertically down. 

e. Faucets shall be equipped with gooseneck spouts. A 
gooseneck spout is a deck or fixture-mounted spout 
so the discharge point of the spout return is at least 
5 inches (127 mm) above the fixture rim. 


(2) Lavatory 
а. Shall be designed and installed to prevent splashing 
outside of the lavatory. 
b. Shall be well-fitted and sealed to prevent water leaks 
onto or into the cabinetry or wall spaces. 
c. Design of lavatories and cabinetry shall not permit 
storage beneath the fixture basin. 
d. Shall be constructed of nonporous material. 
Hangers. See Supports. 
Health Care Facility's Governing Body. The person or 
persons who have the overall legal responsibility for the oper- 
ation of a health care facility. [NFPA 99:3.3.74] 
High Hazard. See Contamination. 
Horizontal Branch. A drainpipe extending laterally from 
soil or waste stack or building drain with or without vertical 
sections or branches, which receives the discharge from one 
or more fixture drains and conducts it to the soil or waste 
stack or the building drain. 


Horizontal Pipe. A pipe or fitting that is installed in a hor- 
izontal position or which makes an angle of less than 45 
degrees (0.79 rad) with the horizontal. 


Hot Water. Water at a temperature exceeding or equal to 
120°F (49°C). 

House Drain. See Building Drain. 

House Sewer. See Building Sewer. 


Hydromechanical Grease Interceptor. A plumbing 
appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary 
drainage system to intercept nonpetroleum fats, oil, and 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


grease (FOG) from a wastewater discharge and is identified 
by flow rate, and separation and retention efficiency. The 
design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical sepa- 
ration, interior baffling, or barriers in combination or sepa- 
rately, and one of the following: 


(1) External flow control, with an air intake (vent), directly 
connected. 


(2) External flow control, without air intake (vent), directly 
connected. 


(3) Without external flow control, directly connected. 
(4) Without external flow control, indirectly connected. 


These interceptors comply with the requirements of 
Table 1014.2.1. Hydromechanical grease interceptors are 
generally installed inside. 


211.0 


Indirect-Fired Water Heater. A water heater consisting of 
a storage tank equipped with an internal or external heat 
exchanger used to transfer heat from an external source to 
heat potable water. The storage tank either contains heated 
potable water or water supplied from an external source, such 
as a boiler. 

Indirect Waste Pipe. A pipe that does not connect directly 
to the drainage system but conveys liquid wastes by dis- 
charging into a plumbing fixture, interceptor, or receptacle 
that is directly connected to the drainage system. 
Individual Vent. A pipe installed to vent a fixture trap, and 
that connects with the vent system above the fixture served or 
terminates in the open air. 

Industrial Waste. Liquid or water-borne waste from indus- 
trial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage. 


Insanitary. A condition that is contrary to sanitary princi- 
ples or is injurious to health. 


Conditions to which “insanitary” shall apply include the 
following: 


(1) A trap that does not maintain a proper trap seal. 


(2) An opening in a drainage system, except where lawful 
that is not provided with an approved liquid-sealed trap. 


(3) A plumbing fixture or other waste discharging receptor 
or device that is not supplied with water sufficient to flush 
and maintain the fixture or receptor in a clean condition. 


(4) A defective fixture, trap, pipe, or fitting. 


(5) A trap, except where in this code exempted, directly con- 
nected to a drainage system, the seal of which is not pro- 
tected against siphonage and backpressure by a vent pipe. 


(6) A connection, cross-connection, construction, or condi- 
tion, temporary or permanent that would permit or make 
possible by any means whatsoever for an unapproved 
foreign matter to enter a water distribution system used 
for domestic purposes. 

(7) The preceding enumeration of conditions to which the 
term “insanitary” shall apply, shall not preclude the 
application of that term to conditions that are, in fact, 
insanitary. 


37 


DEFINITIONS 


Interceptor (Clarifier). A device designed and installed to 
separate and retain deleterious, hazardous, or undesirable 
matter from normal wastes and permit normal sewage or liq- 
uid wastes to discharge into the disposal terminal by gravity. 


Invert. The lowest portion of the inside of a horizontal pipe. 
Irrigation Field. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] An intended desti- 


nation for gray water in the receiving landscape, including 
but not limited to, a drip irrigation system, mulch basin, or 
other approved method of dispersal for irrigation purposes. 


212.0 -J- 


Joint, Brazed. A joint obtained by joining of metal parts 
with alloys that melt at temperatures exceeding 840°F 
(449°C), but less than the melting temperature of the parts to 
be joined. 

Joint, Compression. A multipiece joint with cup-shaped 
threaded nuts that, when tightened, compress tapered sleeves 
so that they form a tight joint on the periphery of the tubing 
they connect. 

Joint, Flanged. One made by bolting together a pair of 
flanged ends. 

Joint, Flared. A metal-to-metal compression joint in which 
a conical spread is made on the end of a tube that is com- 
pressed by a flare nut against a mating flare. 


»lJoint, Heat-Fusion. A joint used in some thermoplastic 


systems to connect the pipe to fittings or pipe lengths directly 
to one another (butt-fusion). This method of joining pipe to 
fittings includes socket-fusion, electro-fusion, and saddle- 
fusion. This method of welding involves the application of 
heat and pressure to the components, allowing them to fuse 
together forming a bond between the pipe and fitting. 


Joint, Mechanical. The general form for gas-tight or liquid- 
tight joints obtained by the joining of parts through a positive 
holding mechanical construction. 

Joint, Press-Connect. A permanent mechanical joint 
incorporating an elastomeric seal or an elastomeric seal and 
corrosion resistant grip ring. The joint is made with a press- 
ing tool and jaw or ring that complies with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. 

Joint, Soldered. A joint obtained by the joining of metal 
parts with metallic mixtures or alloys that melt at a tempera- 
ture up to and including 840?F (449?C). 

Joint, Welded. A gastight joint obtained by the joining of 
metal parts in the plastic molten state. 


213.0 -K- 
No definitions. 
214.0 -L- 


Labeled. Equipment or materials bearing a label of a listing 
agency (accredited conformity assessment body). See Listed 
(third-party certified). 

[HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Labeled" means equipment or materi- 
als to which has been attached a label, symbol or other iden- 
tifying mark of an organization, approved by the Department, 


38 


that maintains a periodic inspection program of production of 
labeled products, installations, equipment, or materials and 
by whose labeling the manufacturer indicates compliance with 
appropriate standards or performance in a specified manner. 


Lavatories in Sets. Two or three lavatories that are served 
by one trap. 


Lavatory. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Lavatory" shall mean a 
plumbing fixture used for washing the hands, arms, face and 
head. 


Leader. An exterior vertical drainage pipe for conveying 
storm water from roof or gutter drains. See Downspout. 


Limited-Density Owner-Built Rural Dwelling. [HCD 1] 
"Limited-density owner-built rural dwelling” shall mean any 
structure consisting of one or more habitable rooms intended 
or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for 
living or sleeping, with use restricted to rural areas desig- 
nated by local jurisdiction in compliance with the require- 
ments of Health and Safety Code Section 17958.2. 


Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LP-Gas) Facilities. Lique- 
fied petroleum gas (LP-Gas) facilities include tanks, contain- 
ers, container valves, regulating equipment, meters, 
appurtenances, or any combination thereof for the storage and 
supply of liquefied petroleum gas for a building, structure, or 
premises. 


Liquid Waste. The discharge from a fixture, appliance, or 
appurtenance in connection with a plumbing system that does 
not receive fecal matter. 


Listed. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Listed" means all products that 
appear in a list published by an approved testing or listing 
agency. For additional information, see Health and Safety 
Code Section 17920(h). 


Listed (Third-Party Certified). Equipment or materials 
included in a list published by a listing agency (accredited 
conformity assessment body) that maintains periodic inspec- 
tion of current production of listed equipment or materials 
and whose listing states either that the equipment or material 
complies with approved standards or has been tested and 
found suitable for use in a specified manner. 


Listing Agency. An agency accredited by an independent 
and authoritative conformity assessment body to operate a 
material and product listing and labeling (certification) sys- 
tem and that are accepted by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion, which is in the business of listing or labeling. The system 
includes initial and ongoing product testing, a periodic inspec- 
tion on current production of listed (certified) products, and 
that makes available a published report of such listing in 
which specific information is included that the material or 
product is in accordance with applicable standards and found 
safe for use in a specific manner. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] "Listing Agency" means an agency 
approved by the department that is in the business of listing 
and labeling products, materials, equipment, and installa- 
tions tested by an approved testing agency, and that main- 
tains a periodic inspection program on current production of 
listed products, equipment, and installations, and that, at least 
annually, makes available a published report of these listings. 
For additional information, see Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tion 17920(1). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Lot. A single or individual parcel or area of land legally 
recorded or validated by other means acceptable to the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction on which is situated a building or 
which is the site of any work regulated by this code, together 
with the yards, courts, and unoccupied spaces legally required 
for the building or works, and that is owned by or is in the law- 
ful possession of the owner of the building or works. 


Low Hazard. See Pollution. 


Low-Pressure Water Dispenser. A terminal fitting 
located downstream of a pressure reducing valve that dis- 
penses drinking hot water above 71?C (160?F) or cold water 
or both at a pressure of 105 kPa (15 psi) or less. 


Low VOC Cement. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Cement with a 
volatile organic compound (VOC) content of less than or equal 
to 490 g/L for CPVC Cement, 510 g/L for PVC Cement, and 
325 g/L for ABS Cement, as determined by the South Coast 
Air Quality Management Districts Laboratory Methods of 
Analysis for Enforcement Samples, Method 316A. 


Low VOC One-Step Cement. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Listed 
solvent cements that do not require the use of primer with a 
volatile organic compound (VOC) content of less than or equal 
to 490 g/L for CPVC Cement, 510 g/L for PVC Cement, and 
325 g/L for ABS Cement, as determined by the South Coast Air 
Quality Management Districts Laboratory Methods of Analy- 
sis for Enforcement Samples, Method 316A. 


Low VOC Primer. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Primer with a volatile 
organic compound (VOC) content of less than or equal to 550 
g/L, as determined by the South Coast Air Quality Manage- 
ment Districts Laboratory Methods of Analysis for Enforce- 
ment Samples, Method 316A. 


215.0 -M- 


Macerating Toilet System. A system comprised of a sump 
with macerating pump and with connections for a water closet 
and other plumbing fixtures, which is designed to accept, 
grind and pump wastes to an approved point of discharge. 


Main. The principal artery of a system of continuous piping 
to which branches may be connected. 


Main Sewer. See Public Sewer. 


Main Vent. The principal artery of the venting system to 
which vent branches may be connected. 


May. A permissive term. 


| Medical Air. For purposes of this code, medical air is air sup- 
plied from cylinders, bulk containers, or medical air com- 

| pressors or reconstituted from oxygen USP and oil-free, dry 
nitrogen NF. [NFPA 99:3.3.106] 


Medical Gas. A patient medical gas or medical support gas. 
(See also Patient Medical Gas and Medical Support Gas) 
[NFPA 99:3.3.108] 


Manifold. A device for connecting the outlets of one or 
more gas cylinders to the central piping system for that 
specific gas. [NFPA 99:3.3.103] 


Medical Gas System. An assembly of equipment and 
piping for the distribution of nonflammable medical 
gases such as oxygen, nitrous oxide, compressed air, car- 
bon dioxide, and helium. [NFPA 99:3.3.109] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


Medical Support Gas. Nitrogen or instrument air used 
for any medical support purpose (e.g., to remove excess 
moisture from instruments before further processing, or 
to operate medical-surgical tools, air-driven booms, pen- 
dants, or similar applications) and, if appropriate to the 
procedures, used in laboratories and are not respired as 
part of any treatment. Medical support gas falls under the 
general requirements for medical gases. [NFPA 
99:3.3.111] 


Medical-Surgical Vacuum. A method used to provide a 
source of drainage, aspiration, and suction in order to remove 
body fluids from patients. [NFPA 99:3.3.112] 


Medical-Surgical Vacuum System. An assembly of cen- 
tral vacuum-producing equipment and a network of piping for 
patient suction in medical, medical-surgical, and waste anes- 
thetic gas disposal (WAGD) applications. [NFPA 99:3.3.113] 


Meter. An instrument or device for recording the quantity of 
a product passing through a particular outlet. (See Water 
Code Section 516 for additional details.) 


Mid-Story Guide. A support designed to keep piping in 
alignment, located mid-way between floors or a floor and 
ceiling. 

Mobile Home Park Sewer. That part of the horizontal pip- 
ing of a drainage system that begins 2 feet (610 mm) down- 
stream from the last mobile home site and conveys it to a 
public sewer, private sewer, private sewage disposal system, 
or other point of disposal. 

Mulch. Organic materials, such as wood chips and fines, tree 
bark chips, and pine needles that are used in a mulch basin to 
conceal gray water outlets and permit the infiltration of gray 
water. 

Mulch Basin. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] A subsurface type of 
irrigation or disposal field filled with mulch or other 
approved permeable material of sufficient depth, length, and 
width to prevent ponding or runoff. A mulch basin may 
include a basin around a tree, a trough along a row of plants, 
or other shapes necessary for irrigation or disposal. 


216.0 -N- 


Nitrogen NF. Nitrogen complying as a minimum with nitro- 
gen NF. [NFPA 99:3.3.119.1] 

Nonwater Supplied Urinal. [HCD 1] A plumbing fixture 
which does not require water supply and is designed to 
receive and convey the uninhibited flow of liquid waste to the 
gravity drainage system. 

Nonwater Urinal with Drain Cleansing Action. A non- 
water urinal that conveys waste into the drainage system with- 
out the use of water for flushing and automatically performs a 
drain-cleansing action after a predetermined amount of time. 
Nuisance. Includes, but is not limited to: 


(1) A public nuisance known at common law or in equity 
jurisprudence. 


(2) Where work regulated by this code is dangerous to 
human life or is detrimental to health and property. 


(3) Inadequate or unsafe water supply or sewage disposal 
system. 


39 


DEFINITIONS 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] “Nuisance” shall mean any nuisance as 
defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17920(1). 


Notes: 


1. Forapplications subject to the Mobilehome Parks Act as 
referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.2 of this code, refer to Cal- 
ifornia Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chap- 
ter 2 for the definition of “Nuisance”. 


2. For applications subject to the Special Occupancy Parks 
Act as referenced in Section 1.8.3.2.3 of this code, refer 
to California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, 
Chapter 2.2 for the definition of “Nuisance”. 


217.0 -0- 


Offset. A combination of elbows or bends in a line of piping 
that brings one section of the pipe out of line but into a line 
parallel with the other section. 

Oil Interceptor. See Interceptor (Clarifier). 

On-Site Treated Nonpotable Water. [BSC-CG & HCD 
1] Nonpotable water that has been collected, treated, and 
intended to be used on-site and is suitable for direct benefi- 
cial use. Sources for on-site treated nonpotable water include, 
but are not limited to, gray water; rainwater; stormwater; 
reclaimed (recycled) water; cooling tower blow-down water; 
and foundation drainage. 


218.0 -P- 


Patient Care Space. Any space of a health care facility 

wherein patients are intended to be examined or treated. 

[NFPA 99:3.3.140] 
Category 1 Space. Space in which failure of equip- 
ment or a system is likely to cause major injury or death 
of patients, staff, or visitors. [NFPA 99:3.3.140.1] 
Category 2 Space. Space in which failure of equip- 
ment or a system is likely to cause minor injury to 
patients, staff, or visitors. [NFPA 99:3.3.140.2] 
Category 3 Space. Space in which the failure of 
equipment or a system is not likely to cause injury to 
patients, staff, or visitors but can cause discomfort. 
[NFPA 99:3.3.140.3] 
Category 4 Space. Space in which failure of equip- 
ment or a system is not likely to have a physical impact 
on patient care. [NFPA 99:3.3.140.4] 

Patient Medical Gas. Piped gases such as oxygen, nitrous 

oxide, helium, carbon dioxide, and medical air that are used 

in the application of human respiration and the calibration of 

medical devices used for human respiration. [NFPA 

99:3.3.144] 

PB. Polybutylene. 

PE. Polyethylene. 

PE-AL-PE. Polyethylene-aluminum-polyethylene. 


PE-RT. Polyethylene of raised temperature. 


40 


Penetration Firestop System. A specific assemblage of 
field-assembled materials, or a factory-made device, which 
has been tested to a standard test method and, where installed 
properly on penetrating piping materials, is capable of main- 
taining the fire- resistance rating of assemblies penetrated. 
Person. A natural person, his heirs, executor, administra- 
tors, or assigns and shall also include a firm, corporation, 
municipal or quasi-municipal corporation, or governmental 
agency. The singular includes the plural, male includes 
female. 


PEX. Cross-linked polyethylene. 


PEX-AL-PEX. Cross-linked polyethylene-aluminum-cross- 
linked polyethylene. 


Pipe. A cylindrical conduit or conductor is conforming to 
the dimensions commonly known as “pipe size.” 


Plumbing. The business, trade, or work having to do with 
the installation, removal, alteration, or repair of plumbing sys- 
tems or parts thereof. 


Plumbing Appliance. A special class of device or equip- 
ment that is intended to perform a special plumbing function. 
Its operation, control, or both may be dependent upon one or 
more energized components, such as motors, controls, heat- 
ing elements, or pressure- or temperature-sensing elements. 
Such device or equipment may operate automatically through 
one or more of the following actions: a time cycle, a temper- 
ature range, a pressure range, a measured volume or weight; 
or the device or equipment may be manually adjusted or con- 
trolled by the user or operator. 


Plumbing Appurtenance. A manufactured device, a pre- 
fabricated assembly, or an on-the-job assembly of component 
parts that is an adjunct to the basic piping system and plumb- 
ing fixtures. An appurtenance demands no additional water 
supply, nor does it add a discharge load to a fixture or the 
drainage system. It performs some useful function in the oper- 
ation, maintenance, servicing, economy, or safety of the 
plumbing system. 


Plumbing Fixture. An approved type installed receptacle, 
device or appliance that is supplied with water or that receives 
liquid or liquid-borne wastes and discharges such wastes into 
the drainage system to which it may be directly or indirectly 
connected. Industrial or commercial tanks, vats, and similar 
processing equipment are not plumbing fixtures, but may be 
connected to or discharged into approved traps or plumbing 
fixtures where and as otherwise provided for elsewhere in this 
code. 


Plumbing Official. See Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Plumbing System. Includes all potable water, alternate 
water sources, building supply, and distribution pipes; all 
plumbing fixtures and traps; all drainage and vent pipes; and 
all building drains and building sewers, including their 
respective joints and connections, devices, receptors, and 
appurtenances within the property lines of the premises and 
shall include potable water piping, potable water treating or 
using equipment, medical gas and medical vacuum systems, 
liquid and fuel gas piping, and water heaters and vents for 
same. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Plumbing Vent. A pipe provided to ventilate a plumbing 
system, to prevent trap siphonage and backpressure, or to 
equalize the air pressure within the drainage system. 


Plumbing Vent System. A pipe or pipes installed to pro- 
vide a flow of air to or from a drainage system or to provide 
a circulation of air within such system to protect trap seals 
from siphonage and backpressure. 


Point-of-Entry, Water Treatment Unit. A device serving 
the water distribution system of a building for the purposes of 
altering, modifying, adding, or removing minerals, chemi- 
cals, contaminants, and suspended solids in the water. 


Point-of-Use, Water Treatment Unit. A device serving a 
single atmospheric outlet such as a faucet for the purposes of 
altering, modifying, adding, or removing any minerals, chem- 
icals, contaminants, and suspended solids in water. 
Pollution. An impairment of the quality of the potable water 
to the degree that does not create a hazard to the public health 
but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aes- 
thetic qualities of such potable water for domestic use. Also, 
defined as “Low Hazard." 


Potable Water. Water that is satisfactory for drinking, culi- 
nary, and domestic purposes and that meets the requirements 
of the Health Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


PP. Polypropylene. 


Pre-fabricated Shower Enclosure. A factory-assembled 
watertight structure with enclosing walls, a drain, and door 
or open access way. 


Pressure. The normal force exerted by a homogeneous liq- 
uid or gas, per unit of area, on the wall of the container. 


Residual Pressure. The pressure available at the fix- 
ture or water outlet after allowance is made for pressure 
drop due to friction loss, head, meter, and other losses in 
the system during maximum demand periods. 


Static Pressure. The pressure is existing without any 
flow. 


Pressure-Balancing Valve. A mixing valve that senses 
incoming hot and cold water pressures and compensates for 
fluctuations in either to stabilize outlet temperature. 


Pressure-Lock-Type Connection. A mechanical con- 
nection that depends on an internal retention device to pre- 
vent pipe or tubing separation. The connection is made by 
inserting the pipe or tubing into the fitting to a prescribed 
depth. 


Privacy Compartment. [BSC & DSA-SS] A compartment 
enclosing a water closet or urinal provided with floor-to-ceil- 
ing pre-manufactured panels, continuous brackets at abutting 
panels, and a floor-to-ceiling door with continuous hinges and 
full height astragals. Privacy compartments may also be con- 
structed with full-height walls and door with head jamb casing. 


Private or Private Use. Applies to plumbing fixtures in 
residences and apartments, to private bathrooms in hotels, 
hospitals, and health care facilities, and to restrooms in com- 
mercial establishments where the fixtures are intended for the 
use of a family or an individual. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


Private Sewage Disposal System. A septic tank with the 
effluent discharging into a subsurface disposal field, into one 
or more seepage pits, or into a combination of subsurface dis- 
posal field and seepage pit or of such other facilities as may 
be permitted under the procedures set forth elsewhere in this 
code. 


Private Sewer. A building sewer that receives the discharge 
from more than one building drain and conveys it to a public 
sewer, private sewage disposal system, or another point of 
disposal. 


Proportioning System for Medical Air USP. A central 
supply that produces medical air (USP) reconstituted from 
oxygen USP and nitrogen NF by means ofa mixer or blender. 
[NFPA 99:3.3.106.1] 


Public or Public Use. Applies to plumbing fixtures that 
are not defined as private or private use. 


Public Sewer. A common sewer directly controlled by pub- 
lic authority. 


Public Water System. A system for the provision to the 
public of water for human consumption through pipes or 
other constructed conveyances, if such system has at least fif- 
teen service connections or regularly serves an average of 
twenty-five individuals daily for at least 60 days per year. 


Push Fit Fitting. A mechanical fitting where the connec- 
tion is assembled by pushing the tube or pipe into the fitting 
and is sealed with an o-ring. 


PVC. Polyvinyl Chloride. 
PVDF. Polyvinylidene Fluoride. 


219.0 -Q- 


Quick-Disconnect Device. A hand-operated device that 
provides a means for connecting and disconnecting a hose to 
a water supply, and that is equipped with a means to shut off 
the water supply when the device is disconnected. 


Quick-Disconnect Device, Fuel Gas. A hand-operated 
device that provides a means for connecting and disconnect- 
ing an appliance or an appliance connector to a gas supply 
and that is equipped with an automatic means to shut off the 
gas supply when the device is disconnected. [NFPA 
54:3.3.27.3] 


220.0 -R- 


Rainwater. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Precipitation on any pub- 
lic or private parcel that has not entered an offsite storm drain 
system or channel, a flood control channel, or any other stream 
channel, and has not previously been put to beneficial use. 


Rainwater Catchment System. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] A 

facility designed to capture, retain, and store rainwater flow- 
ing off a building, parking lot, or any other manmade imper- 
vious surface for subsequent onsite use. Rainwater catchment 
system is also known as “Rainwater Harvesting System” or 
“Rainwater Capture System. " 


Rainwater Storage Tank. The central component of the 
rainwater catchment system. Also, known as a cistern or rain 
barrel. 


41 


DEFINITIONS 


Receiving Landscape. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Includes 


features such as soil, basins, swales, mulch, and plants. 


Receptor. An approved plumbing fixture or device of such 
material, shape, and capacity as to adequately receive the dis- 
charge from indirect waste pipes, so constructed and located 
as to be readily cleaned. 


Reclaimed (Recycled) Water. [BSC-CG, HCD 1 & 
DWR] Nonpotable water that meets California State Water 
Resources Control Board statewide uniform criteria for dis- 
infected tertiary recycled water. Reclaimed (recycled) water 
is also known as "recycled water" or "reclaimed water ". 


Recycled Water Supply System. [DWR] The building 
supply pipe, the water distribution pipes, and the necessary 
connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, backflow preven- 
tion devices, and all appurtenances carrying or supplying 
reclaimed (recycled) water in or adjacent to the building or 
within the premises. 

Registered Design Professional. An individual who is 
registered or licensed by the laws of the state to perform such 
design work in the jurisdiction. 

Regulating Equipment. Includes valves and controls used 
in a plumbing system that is required to be accessible or read- 
ily accessible. 

Relief Vent. A vent, the primary function of which is to pro- 
vide circulation of air between drainage and vent systems or 
to act as an auxiliary vent on a specially designed system. 
Remote Outlet. Where used for sizing water piping, it is 
the furthest outlet dimension, measuring from the meter, 
either the developed length of the cold-water piping or 
through the water heater to the furthest outlet on the hot-water 
piping. 

Rim. See Flood-Level Rim. 

Riser. A water supply pipe that extends vertically one full 
story or more to convey water to branches or fixtures. 

Roof Drain. A drain installed to receive water collecting on 
the surface of a roof and to discharge it into a leader, down- 
spout, or conductor. 

Roof Washer. A device or method for removal of sediment 
and debris from a collection surface by diverting initial rain- 
fall from entry into the cistern(s). Also, known as a first flush 
device. 

Roughing-In. The installation of all parts of the plumbing 
system that can be completed prior to the installation of fix- 
tures. This includes drainage, water supply, gas piping, vent 
piping, and the necessary fixture supports. 


221.0 -S- 
Sand Interceptor. See Interceptor (Clarifier). 


Scavenging. Evacuation of exhaled mixtures of oxygen and 
nitrous oxide. [NFPA 99:3.3.163] 


Scrub Sink. [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Is a sink used to wash 
and scrub the hands and arms during the septic preparation 


42 


for surgery and equipped with a supply spout as required for 
a handwashing fixture. The scrub sink shall be trimmed with 
foot, knee or electronic sensor controls that do not involve 
contact with the upper extremities. Sensor operated fixtures 
shall be capable of functioning during loss of normal power. 
Single-lever wrist blades shall not be permitted except for the 
temperature pre-set valve. | 
SDR. An abbreviation for “standard dimensional ratio,” 
which is the specific ratio of the average specified outside 
diameter to the minimum wall thickness for outside controlled 
diameter plastic pipe. 


Seam, Welded. See Joint, Welded. 


Seepage Pit. A lined excavation in the ground which 
receives the discharge of a septic tank so designed as to per- 
mit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bot- 
tom and sides. 


Septic Tank. A watertight receptacle that receives the dis- 
charge of a drainage system or part thereof, designed and con- 
structed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through 
a period of detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into 
the soil outside of the tank through a system of open joint pip- 
ing or a seepage pit meeting the requirements of this code. 
Service Piping. The piping and equipment between the 
street gas main and the gas piping system inlet that is installed 
by, and is under the control and maintenance of, the serving 
gas supplier. 

Sewage. Liquid waste containing animal or vegetable mat- 
ter in suspension or solution and that may include liquids con- 
taining chemicals in solution. 

Sewage Ejector. A device for lifting sewage by entraining 
it on a high-velocity jet stream, air, or water. 

Sewage Pump. A permanently installed mechanical device, 
other than an ejector, for removing sewage or liquid waste 
from a sump. 

Shall. Indicates a mandatory requirement. 

Shielded Coupling. An approved elastomeric sealing gas- 
ket with an approved outer shield and a tightening mecha- 
nism. 

Shock Arrester. See Water Hammer Arrester. 


Should. Indicates a recommendation or that which is 
advised but not required. 

Simple System. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] A gray water system 
serving one-and two-family dwellings, townhouses, or other 
occupancies with a discharge of 250 gallons (947 L) per day 
or less. Simple systems exceed a clothes washer system. 

Size and Type of Tubing. See Diameter. 

Slip Joint. An adjustable tubing connection, consisting of a 
compression nut, a friction ring, and a compression washer, 
designed to fit a threaded adapter fitting or a standard taper 
pipe thread. 

Slope. See Grade. 


Soil Pipe. A pipe that conveys the discharge of water clos- 
ets, urinals, clinical sinks, or fixtures having similar functions 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


of collection and removal of domestic sewage, with or with- 
out the discharge from other fixtures to the building drain or 
building sewer. 

Special Wastes. Wastes that require some special method 
of handling, such as the use of indirect waste piping and 
receptors, corrosion-resistant piping, sand, oil or grease inter- 
ceptors, condensers, or other pretreatment facilities. 


Stack. The vertical main of a system of soil, waste, or vent 
piping extending through one or more stories. 


Stack Vent. The extension of soil or waste stacks above the 
highest horizontal drain connected to the stack. 


Standard. A document, the main text of which contains only 
mandatory provisions using the word "shall" to indicate 
requirements and which is in a form generally suitable for 
mandatory reference by another standard or code or for adop- 
tion into law. Nonmandatory provisions shall be located in 
an appendix, footnote, or fine print note and are not to be con- 
sidered a part of the requirements of a standard. 


Standard Cubic Feet per Minute (SCFM). Volumetric 
flow rate of gas in units of standard cubic feet per minute. 
[NFPA 99:3.3.172] 


Station Inlet. An inlet point in a piped medical/surgical vac- 
uum distribution system at which the user makes connections 
and disconnections. [NFPA 99:3.3.173] 


Station Outlet. An outlet point in a piped medical gas dis- 
tribution system at which the user makes connections and dis- 
connections. [NFPA 99:3.3.174] 


Sterilizer. A piece of equipment that disinfects instruments 
and equipment by way of heat. 


Storm Drain. See Building Drain (Storm). 


Storm Sewer. A sewer used for conveying rainwater, sur- 
face water, condensate, cooling water, or similar liquid 
wastes. 


Submeter. [HCD 1] A secondary device beyond a meter that 
measures water consumption of an individual rental unit within 
a multiunit residential structure or mixed-use residential and 
commercial structure. (See Civil Code Section 1954.202(g) and 
Water Code Section 517 for additional details.) 


Subsoil Drain. A drain that collects subsurface or seepage 
water and conveys it to a place of disposal. 


Subsoil Irrigation Field. Gray water irrigation field 
installed in a trench within the layer of soil below the topsoil. 
This system is typically used for irrigation of deep rooted 
plants. 

Subsurface Irrigation Field. Gray water irrigation field 
installed below finished grade within the topsoil. 

Sump. An approved tank or pit that receives sewage or liq- 
uid waste and which is located below the normal grade of the 
gravity system and which must be emptied by mechanical 
means. 

Supports. Supports, hangers, and anchors are devices for 
properly supporting and securing pipe, fixtures, and equip- 
ment. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


Surge Tank. A reservoir to modify the fluctuation in flow 
rates to allow for uniform distribution of gray water to the 
points of irrigation. 


222.0 -T- 


T Rating. The time period that the penetration firestop sys- 
tem, including the penetrating item, limits the maximum tem- 
perature rise of 325?F (181?C) above its initial temperature 
through the penetration on the nonfire side, where tested in 
accordance with ASTM E814 or UL 1479. 
Tailpiece. The pipe or tubing that connects the outlet of a 
plumbing fixture to a trap. 
Testing Agency. [HCD 1] See "Approved Testing Agency ". 
Thermostatic (Temperature Control) Valve. A mixing 
valve that senses outlet temperature and compensates for fluc- 
tuations in incoming hot or cold water temperatures. 
Toilet. [OSHPD 1, 2, 3,4 & 5] A fixture within a toilet room 
which is used for defecation or urination. 
Toilet Facility. A room or space containing not less than one 
lavatory and one water closet. 
Toilet Room. [OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] A room within or on 
the premises containing water closets, urinals, and other 
required facilities. 
Transition Gas Riser. A listed or approved section or sec- 
tions of pipe and fittings used to convey fuel gas and installed 
in a gas piping system to provide a transition from below- 
ground to aboveground. 
Trap. A fitting or device so designed and constructed as to 
provide, where properly vented, a liquid seal that will prevent 
the back passage of air without materially affecting the flow 
of sewage or wastewater through it. 
Trap Arm. Those portions of a fixture drain between a trap 
and the vent. 
Trap Primer. A device and system of piping that maintains 
a water seal in a remote trap. 
Trap Seal. The vertical distance between the crown weir and 
the top dip of the trap. 
Crown Weir (Trap Weir). The lowest point in the 
cross-section of the horizontal waterway at the exit of the 
trap. 
Top Dip (of the trap). The highest point in the internal 
cross-section of the trap at the lowest part of the bend 
(inverted siphon). By contrast, the bottom dip is the low- 
est point in the internal cross-section. 
Treated Gray Water. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Nonpotable 
water meeting the definition of “gray water” collected and 
treated on-site suitable for direct beneficial use. 


223.0 -U- 


UPC. [HCD 1] "UPC" is the latest edition of the Uniform 
Plumbing Code, published by the International Association 
of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. 


Unsanitary. See Insanitary. 
User Outlet. See Station Outlet. 


43 


DEFINITIONS 


224.0 -V- 


Vacuum. A pressure less than that exerted by the atmos- 
phere. 


Vacuum Breaker. See Backflow Preventer. 


Vacuum Relief Valve. A device that prevents excessive 
vacuum in a pressure vessel. 


Vacuum System-Level 1. A system consisting of central 
vacuum-producing equipment with pressure and operating 
controls, shutoff valves, alarm warning systems, gauges, and 
a network of piping extending to and terminating with suit- 
able station inlets at locations where patient suction could be 
required. 

Valve, Balancing. A valve that regulates and controls the 
return of water to the water heater in a recirculating hot water 
piping system. 

Valve, Isolation. A valve that isolates one piece of equip- 
ment from another. 

Valve, Pressure-Relief. A pressure-actuated valve held 
closed by a spring or other means and designed automatically 
to relieve pressure in excess of its setting. 

Valve, Riser. A valve at the base of a vertical riser that iso- 
lates that riser. 

Valve, Service. A valve is serving horizontal piping extend- 
ing from a riser to a station outlet or inlet. 

Valve, Source. A single valve at the source that controls a 
number of units that makes up the source. 

Valve, Zone. A valve that controls the gas or vacuum to a 
particular area. 


Vent. See Plumbing Vent; Dry Vent; Wet Vent. 


Vent Connector, Gas. That portion of a gas venting system 
that connects a listed gas appliance beginning at the draft 
hood or flue collar to a gas vent and is installed entirely within 
the space or area in which the appliance is located. 


Vent Offset. An arrangement of two or more fittings and 

pipe installed for the purpose of locating a vertical section of 

vent pipe in a different but parallel plane with respect to an 

adjacent section of vertical vent pipe. [NFPA 54:3.3.101] 

Vent Pipe. See Plumbing Vent. 

Vent Stack. The vertical vent pipe installed primarily for 

the purpose of providing circulation of air to and from any 

part of the drainage system. 

Vent System. See Plumbing Vent System. 

Vented Appliance. 
Category I Vented Appliance. An appliance that 
operates with a nonpositive vent static pressure and with 
a vent gas temperature that avoids excessive condensate 
production in the vent. [NFPA 54:3.3.4.10.1] 
Category II Vented Appliance. An appliance that 
operates with a nonpositive vent static pressure and with 
a vent gas temperature that can cause excessive conden- 
sate production in the vent. [NFPA 54:3.3.4.10.2] 
Category III Vented Appliance. An appliance that 
operates with a positive vent static pressure and with a 


vent gas temperature that avoids excessive condensate 
production in the vent. [NFPA 54:3.3.4.10.3] 


44 


Category IV Vented Appliance. An appliance that 
operates with a positive vent static pressure and with a 
vent gas temperature that can cause excessive conden- 
sate production in the vent. [NFPA 54:3.3.4.10.4] 
Vented Flow Control Device. A device installed upstream 
from the hydromechanical grease interceptor having an ori- 
fice that controls the rate of flow through the interceptor, and 
an air intake (vent) downstream from the orifice, which 
allows air to be drawn into the flow stream. 
Venting System. A continuous open passageway from the 
flue collar or draft hood of an appliance to the outdoors for the 
purpose of removing flue or vent gases. [NFPA 54:3.3.95.7] 
Vent, Gas. A listed factory-made vent pipe and vent fit- 
tings for conveying flue gases to the outdoors. 
Type B Gas Vent. A factory-made gas vent listed by a 
nationally recognized testing agency for venting listed or 
approved appliances equipped to burn only gas. 
Type BW Gas Vent. A factory-made gas vent listed by 
a nationally recognized testing agency for venting listed or 
approved gas-fired vented wall furnaces. 
Type L Gas Vent. A venting system consisting of listed 
vent piping and fittings for use with oil-burning appli- 
ances listed for use with Type L or with listed gas appli- 
ances. 
Vertical Pipe. A pipe or fitting that is installed in a vertical 


position or that makes an angle of not more than 45 degrees 
(0.79 rad) with the vertical. 


225.0 -W- 

Wall-Hung Water Closet. A water closet installed in such 
a way that no part of the water closet touches the floor. 
Waste. See Liquid Waste and Industrial Waste. 


Waste Pipe. A pipe that conveys only liquid waste, free of 
fecal matter. 

Water Closet. [HCD 1] "Water Closet" is a plumbing fix- 
ture (which may be used for both solids and liquids) in which 
the waste matter is removed by flushing with water. 
Water-Conditioning or Treating Device. A device that 
conditions or treats a water supply to change its chemical con- 
tent or remove suspended solids by filtration. 

Water Distribution Pipe. In a building or premises, a pipe 
that conveys potable water from the building supply pipe to 
the plumbing fixtures and other water outlets. 

Water Hammer Arrester. A device designed to provide 
protection against hydraulic shock in the building water sup- 
ply system. 

Water Heater, Dual Purpose. An appliance intended to 
be a heat source for both space heating and domestic hot 
water applications. 

Water Heater or Hot Water Heating Boiler. An appli- 
ance designed primarily to supply hot water for domestic or 
commercial purposes and equipped with automatic controls 
limiting water temperature to a maximum of 210°F (99°C). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Water Main (Street Main). A water supply pipe for public 
or community use. 

Water Station. A designated location intended to provide 
access to drinking water through a device or appliance. 
Water Supply System. The building supply pipe, the water 
distribution pipes, and the necessary connecting pipes, fit- 
tings, control valves, backflow prevention devices, and all 
appurtenances carrying or supplying potable water in or adja- 
cent to the building or premises. 

Water/Wastewater Utility. A public or private entity which 
may treat, deliver or do both functions to reclaimed (recy- 
cled) water, potable water, or both to wholesale or retail cus- 
tomers. 

Welder, Pipe. A person who specializes in the welding of 
pipes and holds a valid certificate of competency from a rec- 
ognized testing laboratory, based on the requirements of the 
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessels code, Section IX. 

Wet Procedure Locations. The area in a patient care 
space where a procedure is performed that is normally subject 
to wet conditions while patients are present, including stand- 
ing fluids on the floor or drenching of the work area, either of 
which condition is intimate to the patient or staff. [NFPA 
99:3.3.187] 

Wet Vent. A vent that also serves as a drain. 

Whirlpool Bathtub. A bathtub fixture equipped and fitted 
with a circulating piping system designed to accept, circulate, 
and discharge bathtub water upon each use. 


226.0 -X- 
No definitions. 


227.0 -Y- 


Yoke Vent. A pipe connecting upward from soil or waste 
stack to a vent stack to prevent pressure changes in the stacks. 


228.0 -Z- 
No definitions. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


DEFINITIONS 


45 


46 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REGULATIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC ცც | SFM BSCC | ОРН | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X X X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X XX XIX XXIX X 


sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
301.3 
301.3.1 
301.3.1.1 
301.3.1.2 
301.4.1 
| 301.7 
301.8 X 
303.1 Exception 


©“ xXx | +“ OK 
რს“ “+ 


> 


> 


304.1 Exception 
> 310.11 X XX X X 
310.12 X XXX 
310.13 X 
310.14 X X XX 
310.15 X XX 
311.1 Note 
312.2 
312.7 X 
312.11 

313.8 
> 321.0 
322.0 
323.0 


“= жж 
“= жж 


“| x ж 
2 2 X ж 
“| x ж 
2 2 X ж 


X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 47 


48 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 3 
GENERAL REGULATIONS 


301.0 General. 


301.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the general 
requirements, not specific to other chapters, for the installa- 
tion of plumbing systems. 


301.2 Minimum Standards. Pipe, pipe fittings, traps, fix- 
tures, material, and devices used in a plumbing system shall 
be listed (third-party certified) by a listing agency (accredited 
conformity assessment body) as complying with the approved 
applicable recognized standards referenced in this code, and 
shall be free from defects. Unless otherwise provided for in 
this code, materials, fixtures, or devices used or entering into 
the construction of plumbing systems, or parts thereof shall be 
submitted to the Authority Having Jurisdiction for approval 
prior to being installed. 


301.2.1 Marking. Each length of pipe and each pipe fit- 
ting, trap, fixture, material, and device used in a plumb- 
ing system shall have cast, stamped, or indelibly marked 
on it any markings required by the applicable referenced 
standards and listing agency, and the manufacturer's 
mark or name, which shall readily identify the manufac- 
turer to the end user of the product. Where required by 
the approved standard that applies, the product shall be 
marked with the weight and the quality of the product. 
Materials and devices used or entering into the con- 
struction of plumbing and drainage systems, or parts 
thereof shall be marked and identified in a manner satis- 
factory to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Such mark- 
ing shall be done by the manufacturer. Field markings 
shall not be acceptable. 


Exception: Markings shall not be required on nipples 
created from cutting and threading of approved pipe. 


301.2.2 Standards. Standards listed or referred to in 
this chapter or other chapters cover materials that will 
conform to the requirements of this code, where used in 
accordance with the limitations imposed in this or other 
chapters thereof and their listing. Where a standard cov- 
ers materials of various grades, weights, quality, or con- 
figurations, the portion of the listed standard that is 
applicable shall be used. Design and materials for spe- 
cial conditions or materials not provided for herein shall 
be permitted to be used by special permission of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction after the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction has been satisfied as to their adequacy. A 
list of plumbing standards that appear in specific sections 
of this code is referenced in Table 1701.1. Standards ref- 
erenced in Table 1701.1 shall be applied as indicated in 
the applicable referenced section. A list of additional 
approved standards, publications, practices, and guides 
that are not referenced in specific sections of this code 
appear in Table 1701.2. An IAPMO Installation Stan- 
dard is referenced in Appendix I for the convenience of 
the users of this code. It is not considered as a part of this 
code unless formally adopted as such by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


301.2.3 Plastic Pipe, Plastic Pipe Fittings, and 
Components. Plastic pipe, plastic pipe fittings, and 
components other than those for gas shall comply with 
NSF/ANSI 14. I 


301.2.4 Cast-Iron Soil Pipe, Fittings, and Hubless 
Couplings. Cast-iron soil pipe, fittings, and hubless 
couplings shall be third party certified in accordance with 
ASTM C1277 and CISPI 310 for couplings and ASTM 
A888, ASTM A74, and CISPI 301 for pipes and fittings. 


301.2.5 Existing Buildings. In existing buildings or 
premises in which plumbing installations are to be 
altered, repaired, or renovated, the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction has discretionary powers to permit deviation 
from the provisions of this code, provided that such pro- 
posal to deviate is first submitted for proper determina- 
tion in order that health and safety requirements, as they 
pertain to plumbing, shall be observed. 


301.3 Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction 
Equivalency. Nothing in this code is intended to prevent the 
use of systems, methods, or devices of equivalent or superior 
quality, strength, fire resistance, effectiveness, durability, and 
safety over those prescribed by this code. Technical documen- 
tation shall be submitted to the Authority Having Jurisdiction to 
demonstrate equivalency prior to installation. The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to approve or dis- 
approve the system, method, or device for the intended purpose. 
[HCD 1] (See Section 1.8.7) 


However, the exercise of this discretionary approval by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have no effect beyond 
the jurisdictional boundaries of said Authority Having Juris- 
diction. An alternate material or method of construction so 
approved shall not be considered as in accordance with the 
requirements, intent, or both of this code for a purpose other 
than that granted by the Authority Having Jurisdiction where 
the submitted data does not prove equivalency. 


301.3.1 Testing. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall 
have the authority to require tests, as proof of equivalency. 


301.3.1.1 Tests. Tests shall be made in accordance 
with approved or applicable standards, by an 
approved testing agency at the expense of the appli- 
cant. In the absence of such standards, the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to spec- 
ify the test procedure. 


301.3.1.2 Request by Authority Having Juris- 

diction. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall 

have the authority to require tests to be made or 

repeated where there is reason to believe that a mate- 

rial or device no longer is in accordance with the 

requirements on which its approval was based. 
301.4 Flood Hazard Areas. Plumbing systems shall be 
located above the elevation in accordance with the building 
code for utilities and attendant equipment or the elevation of 
the lowest floor, whichever is higher. 


49 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


Exception: Plumbing systems shall be permitted to be 
located below the elevation in accordance with the building 
code for utilities and attendant equipment or the elevation of 
the lowest floor, whichever is higher, provided that the sys- 
tems are designed and installed to prevent water from enter- 
ing or accumulating within their components, and the systems 
are constructed to resist hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads 
and stresses, including the effects of buoyancy, during the 
occurrence of flooding to such elevation. 


301.4.1 Coastal High Hazard Areas. Plumbing sys- 
tems in buildings located in coastal high hazard areas 
shall be in accordance with the requirements of Section 
301.4, and plumbing systems, pipes, and fixtures shall 
not be mounted on or penetrate through walls that are 
intended to breakaway under flood loads in accordance 
with the California Building Code or California Resi- 
dential Code. 


301.5 Alternative Engineered Design. An alternative 
engineered design shall comply with the intent of the provi- 
sions of this code and shall provide an equivalent level of 
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, and 
safety. Material, equipment, or components shall be designed 
and installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installa- 
tion instructions. 


301.5.1 Permit Application. The registered design 
professional shall indicate on the design documents that 
the plumbing system, or parts thereof, is an alternative 
engineered design so that it is noted on the construction 
permit application. The permit and permanent permit 
records shall indicate that an alternative engineered 
design was part of the approved installation. 


301.5.2 Technical Data. The registered design profes- 
sional shall submit sufficient technical data to substanti- 
ate the proposed alternative engineered design and to 
prove that the performance meets the intent of this code. 


301.5.3 Design Documents. The registered design 
professional shall provide two complete sets of signed 
and sealed design documents for the alternative engi- 
neered design for submittal to the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. The design documents shall include floor 
plans and a riser diagram of the work. Where appropri- 
ate, the design documents shall indicate the direction of 
flow, pipe sizes, grade of horizontal piping, loading, and 
location of fixtures and appliances. 


301.5.4 Design Approval. An approval of an alterna- 
tive engineered design shall be at the discretion of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. The exercise of this dis- 
cretionary approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall have no effect beyond the jurisdictional boundaries 
of said Authority Having Jurisdiction. An alternative 
engineered design so approved shall not be considered 
as in accordance with the requirements, intent, or both 
of this code for a purpose other than that granted by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

301.5.5 Design Review. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall have the authority to require testing of the 
alternative engineered design in accordance with Section 
301.3.1, including the authority to require an independ- 


50 


ent review of the design documents by a registered 
design professional selected by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction and at the expense of the applicant. 


301.5.6 Inspection and Testing. The alternative engi- 
neered design shall be tested and inspected in accordance 
with the submitted testing and inspection plan and the 
requirements of this code. 


301.6 Tall Wood (Mass Timber) Buildings. Plumbing 
systems installed in tall wood (mass timber) buildings, shall 
comply with the following: 


(1) Be designed by a licensed plumbing contractor or a reg- 
Istered design professional in accordance with this code 
and the building code. 


(2) Be designed to accommodate expansion, contraction, and 
differential movement between parts of a tall wood (mass 
timber) building in accordance with Section 312.2. 


301.7 One- and Two-Family Dwellings. [HCD 1] The || 
provisions contained in this code shall not apply to one- and 
two-family dwelling private sewage disposal systems and 
minimum plumbing facilities when alternate facilities or 
installations have been approved by the local health author- 
ity, provided that such alternative facilities or installations 
provide substantially equivalent or greater protection to 
health and safety. 


301.8 OSHPD 1R. [OSHPD 1R] For OSHPD 1R, refer to || 
Section 309 of the California Existing Building Code for gen- 
eral requirements. 


302.0 Iron Pipe Size (IPS) Pipe. 


302.1 General. Iron, steel, copper, and copper alloy pipe 
shall be standard-weight iron pipe size (IPS) pipe. 


303.0 Disposal of Liquid Waste. 


303.1 General. It shall be unlawful for a person to cause, 
suffer, or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement, or 
other liquid wastes, in a place or manner, except through and 
by means of an approved drainage system, installed and main- 
tained in accordance with the provisions of this code. 


Exception: [HCD 1] Limited-density owner-built rural 
dwellings. A water closet shall not be required when an alter- 
nate system is provided and has been approved by the local 
health official. Where an alternative to the water closet is 
installed, a system for the disposal or treatment of graywater 
shall be provided to the dwelling. Graywater systems shall be 
designed according to water availability, use and discharge. 
The design, use and maintenance standards of such systems 
shall be the prerogative of the local health official. 


304.0 Connections to Plumbing System Required. 


304.1 General. Plumbing fixtures, drains, appurtenances, 
and appliances, used to receive or discharge liquid wastes or 
sewage, shall be connected properly to the drainage system of 
the building or premises, in accordance with the requirements 
of this code. 


Exception: [HCD 1] Limited-density owner-built rural 
dwellings. Where conventional plumbing, in all or in part, is 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


installed within the structure, it shall be installed in accordance 
with the provisions of this code. Alternative materials and 
methods shall be permitted provided that the design complies 
with the intent of the code, and that such alternatives shall per- 
form to protect health and safety for the intended purpose. 


305.0 Damage to Drainage System or Public Sewer. 


305.1 Unlawful Practices. It shall be unlawful for a per- 
son to deposit, by any means whatsoever, into a plumbing fix- 
ture, floor drain, interceptor, sump, receptor, or device, which 
is connected to a drainage system, public sewer, private 
sewer, septic tank, or cesspool, any ashes; cinders; solids; 
rags; inflammable, poisonous, or explosive liquids or gases; 
oils; grease; or any other thing whatsoever that is capable of 
causing damage to the drainage system or public sewer. 


306.0 Industrial Wastes. 


306.1 Detrimental Wastes. Wastes detrimental to the pub- 
lic sewer system or detrimental to the functioning of the sewage 
treatment plant shall be treated and disposed of as found nec- 
essary and directed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


306.2 Safe Discharge. Sewage or other waste from a 
plumbing system that is capable of being deleterious to sur- 
face or subsurface waters shall not be discharged into the 
ground or a waterway unless it has first been rendered safe 
by some acceptable form of treatment in accordance with the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


307.0 Location. 


307.1 System. Except as otherwise provided in this code, 
no plumbing system, drainage system, building sewer, pri- 
vate sewage disposal system, or parts thereof shall be located 
in a lot other than the lot that is the site of the building, struc- 
ture, or premises served by such facilities. 


307.2 Ownership. No subdivision, sale, or transfer of own- 
ership of existing property shall be made in such manner that 
the area, clearance, and access requirements of this code are 
decreased. 


308.0 Prohibited Locations. 


308.1 General. Piping, fixtures, appliances, or equipment 
shall not be so located as to interfere with the normal use 
thereof or with the normal operation and use of windows, 
doors, or other required facilities. 


309.0 Workmanship. 


309.1 Engineering Practices. Design, construction, and 
workmanship shall be in accordance with accepted engineer- 
ing practices and shall be of such character as to secure the 
results sought to be obtained by this code. 

309.2 Concealing Imperfections. It is unlawful to conceal 
cracks, holes, or other imperfections in materials by welding, 
brazing, or soldering or by using therein or thereon paint, wax, 
tar, solvent cement, or other leak-sealing or repair agent. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


309.3 Burred Ends. Burred ends of pipe and tubing shall 
be reamed to the full bore of the pipe or tube, and chips shall 
be removed. 


309.4 Installation Practices. Plumbing systems shall be 
installed in a workmanlike manner which is in accordance 
with this code, applicable standards, and the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. All materials shall be installed so as 
not to adversely affect the systems and equipment or the 
structure of the building, and in compliance with all laws and 
other provisions of this code. All plumbing systems shall be 
in accordance with construction documents approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


309.5 Sound Transmission. Plumbing piping systems 
shall be designed and installed in conformance with sound 
limitations as required in the California Building Code. 


309.6 Dead Legs. Dead legs shall have a method of flush- 
ing. 


310.0 Prohibited Fittings and Practices. 


310.1 Fittings. No double hub fitting, single or double tee 
branch, single or double tapped tee branch, side inlet quarter 
bend, running thread, band, or saddle shall be used as a 
drainage fitting. | 
310.2 Drainage and Vent Piping. No drainage or vent 
piping shall be drilled and tapped for the purpose of making 
connections thereto, and no cast-iron soil pipe shall be 
threaded. 


310.3 Waste Connection. No waste connection shall be 
made to a closet bend or stub of a water closet or similar fix- 
ture. 


310.4 Use of Vent and Waste Pipes. Except as here- 
inafter provided in Section 908.0 through Section 911.0, no 
vent pipe shall be used as a soil or waste pipe, nor shall a soil 
or waste pipe be used as a vent. Also, single-stack drainage 
and venting systems with unvented branch lines are prohib- 
ited. 


310.5 Obstruction of Flow. No fitting, fixture and piping 
connection, appliance, device, or method of installation that 
obstructs or retards the flow of water, wastes, sewage, or air 
in the drainage or venting systems, in an amount exceeding 
the normal frictional resistance to flow, shall be used unless 
it is indicated as acceptable in this code or is approved in 
accordance with Section 301.2 of this code. The enlargement 
of a 3 inch (80 mm) closet bend or stub to 4 inches (100 mm) 
shall not be considered an obstruction. 

310.6 Dissimilar Metals. Except for necessary valves, 
where intermembering or mixing of dissimilar metals occurs, 
the point of connection shall be confined to exposed or acces- 
sible locations. 

310.7 Direction of Flow. Valves, pipes, and fittings shall 
be installed in correct relationship to the direction of flow. 
310.8 Screwed Fittings. Screwed fittings shall be ABS, 
cast-iron, copper, copper alloy, malleable iron, PVC, steel, or 
other approved materials. Threads shall be tapped out of solid 
metal or molded in solid ABS or PVC. 


51 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


310.9 Female Plastic Connections. Female plastic 
tapered (NPT) threaded connections shall not be allowed to be 
used when threaded onto a male metallic connection. 


Exception: Female plastic parallel (straight) threaded con- 
nections shall be permitted. 


310.10 ABS and PVC Transition Joints. Except as pro- 
vided in Section 705.9.4, PVC and ABS pipe and fittings shall 
not be solvent welded to dissimilar material. 

1310.11 [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Drainage piping over oper- 
ating and delivery rooms, nurseries, food preparation cen- 
ters, food-serving facilities, food storage areas, compounding 
ante and buffer rooms and other sensitive areas shall be kept 
to a minimum and shall not be exposed. Special precautions 
shall be taken to protect these areas from possible leakage 
from necessary overhead drainage piping systems. Piping 
over switchboards, panel boards, and motor control centers 
are subject to restrictions of the California Electrical Code 
where applicable. 


|| 310.12 [OSHPD 1, 3, 4 & 5] Floor drains, waste traps, san- 
itary drainage cleanouts and handwashing fixtures shall not 
be installed in operating and delivery rooms. Floor drains 
with self-priming traps may be installed in cystoscopic rooms. 
Floor drains shall not be installed in compounding buffer or 
ante rooms. 


|| 310.13 [SFM] For applications listed in Section 1.11.0 regu- 
lated by the Office of the State Fire Marshal, plastic piping shall 
not be exposed as a portion of the interior room finish in a build- 
ing or structure if the piping has a flame-spread rating exceed- 

|| ing 75 when tested in accordance with ASTM E84, “Test for 
Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials.” 


|| 310.14 Services/Systems and Utilities. [OSHPD 1, 2, 4 
& 5] Refer to Sections 1224.4.1, 1225.2.1 and 1228.4.1.1, Cal- 
ifornia Building Code. 


||310.15 Telephone and Data Equipment Rooms. 
[OSHPD 1, 4 & 5] Where telecommunications service 
entrance rooms, technology equipment centers, or technology 
distribution rooms are provided in accordance with Section 
1224.5 of the California Building Code, plumbing equipment 
and fixtures that are not directly related to the support of the 
room shall not be installed in or pass through the room. 


311.0 Independent Systems. 


311.1 General. The drainage system of each new building 
and new work installed in an existing building shall be sepa- 
rate and independent from that of any other building, and, 
where available, every building shall have an independent 
connection with a public or private sewer. 


Exception: Where one building stands in the rear of another 
| building on an interior lot, and no public or private sewer is 
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an 
adjoining court, yard, or driveway, the building drain from 
the front building shall be permitted to be extended to the rear 
building. 
Note: Accessory dwelling units are not required to have inde- 
pendent service utility (drainage) connections provided they 
meet the specific requirements in Government Code Section 
65852.2. 


52 


312.0 Protection of Piping, Tubing, Materials, and | 
Structures. 


312.1 General. Piping passing under or through walls shall 
be protected from breakage. Piping passing through or under 
cinders or other corrosive materials shall be protected from 
external corrosion in an approved manner. Approved provi- 
sions shall be made for expansion of hot water piping. Voids 
around piping passing through concrete floors on the ground 
shall be sealed. 


312.2 Installation. Piping in connection with a plumbing 
system shall be so installed that piping or connections will 
not be subject to undue strains or stresses, and provisions shall 
be made for expansion, contraction, and structural settlement. 
No plumbing piping shall be directly embedded in concrete or 
masonry. No structural member shall be seriously weakened 
or impaired by cutting, notching, or otherwise, as defined in 
the California Building Code or California Residential Code. 


312.3 Building Sewer and Drainage Piping. No build- 
ing sewer or other drainage piping or part thereof, constructed 
of materials other than those approved for use under or within 
a building, shall be installed under or within 2 feet (610 mm) 
of a building or structure, or less than 1 foot (305 mm) below 
the surface of the ground. 


312.4 Corrosion, Erosion, and Mechanical Damage. 
Piping subject to corrosion, erosion, or mechanical damage 
shall be protected in an approved manner. 


312.5 Protectively Coated Pipe. Protectively coated pipe 
or tubing shall be inspected and tested, and a visible void, 
damage, or imperfection to the pipe coating shall be repaired 
in an approved manner. 


312.6 Freezing Protection. No water, soil, or waste pipe 
shall be installed or permitted outside of a building, in attics or 
crawl spaces, or in an exterior wall unless, where necessary, 
adequate provision 1s made to protect such pipe from freezing. 


312.7 Fire-Resistant Construction. Piping penetrations 
of fire-resistance-rated walls, partitions, floors, floor/ceiling 
assemblies, roof/ceiling assemblies, or shaft enclosures shall 
be protected in accordance with the requirements of the Са/- 
ifornia Building Code or California Residential Code. 


312.8 Waterproofing of Openings. Joints at the roof 
around pipes, ducts, or other appurtenances shall be made 
watertight by the use of lead, copper, galvanized iron, or other 
approved flashings or flashing material. Exterior wall open- 
ings shall be made watertight. Counterflashing shall not 
restrict the required internal cross-sectional area of the vent. 


312.9 Steel Nail Plates. Plastic piping or tubing, and cop- 
per or copper alloy piping or tubing penetrating framing 
members to within 1 inch (25.4 mm) of the exposed framing 
shall be protected by steel nail plates not less than No. 18 
gauge (0.0478 inches) (1.2 mm) in thickness. The steel nail 
plate shall extend along the framing member not less than 1^ 
inches (38 mm) beyond the outside diameter of the pipe or 
tubing. Fuel gas piping shall be protected in accordance with | 
Section 1210.4.3. 


312.10 Sleeves. Sleeves shall be provided to protect pip- 
ing through concrete and masonry walls, and concrete floors. 


Exception: Sleeves shall not be required where openings are 
drilled or bored. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


312.10.1 Building Loads. Piping through concrete or 
masonry walls shall not be subject to a load from build- 
ing construction. 


312.10.2 Exterior Walls. In exterior walls, annular 
space between sleeves and pipes shall be sealed and 
made watertight, as approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. A penetration through fire-resistive con- 
struction shall be in accordance with Section 312.7. 


312.10.3 Firewalls. A pipe sleeve through a firewall 
shall have space around the pipe completely sealed with 
an approved fire-resistive material in accordance with 
other codes. 


312.11 Structural Members. A structural member weak- 
ened or impaired by cutting, notching, or otherwise shall be 
reinforced, repaired, or replaced so as to be left in a safe struc- 
tural condition in accordance with the requirements of the 
California Building Code or California Residential Code. 


312.12 Rodentproofing. Strainer plates on drain inlets 
shall be designed and installed so that no opening exceeds /% 
of an inch (12.7 mm) in the least dimension. 


312.12.1 Meter Boxes. Meter boxes shall be con- 
structed in such a manner as to restrict rodents or vermin 
from entering a building by following the service pipes 
from the box into the building. 


312.12.2 Metal Collars. In or on buildings where 
openings have been made in walls, floors, or ceilings for 
the passage of pipes, such openings shall be closed and 
protected by the installation of approved metal collars 
securely fastened to the adjoining structure. 


312.12.3 Tub Waste Openings. Tub waste openings 
in framed construction to crawl spaces at or below the 
first floor shall be protected by the installation of 
approved metal collars or metal screen securely fastened 
to the adjoining structure with no opening exceeding % 
of an inch (12.7 mm) in the least dimension. 


1313.0 Hangers, Supports, and Anchors. 


[313.1 General. Piping, tubing, fixtures, appliances, and 
appurtenances shall be supported in accordance with this 
code, the manufacturer's installation instructions, and in 
accordance with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Seismic 
restraints shall be in accordance with the building code. 
313.2 Material. Hangers, supports, and anchors shall be of 
sufficient strength to support the weight of the pipe or tubing 
and its contents. Piping or tubing shall be isolated from 
incompatible materials. 

313.3 Suspended Piping. Suspended piping shall be sup- 
ported at intervals not to exceed those shown in Table 313.3. 
313.4 Alignment. Piping shall be supported in such a man- 
ner as to maintain its alignment and prevent sagging. 

313.5 Underground Installation. Piping in the ground 
shall be laid on a firm bed for its entire length; where other 
support is otherwise provided, it shall be approved in accor- 
dance with Section 301.2. 

313.6 Hanger Rod Sizes. Hanger rod sizes shall be not 
smaller than those shown in Table 313.6. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


TABLE 313.6 
HANGER ROD SIZES 
PIPE AND TUBE SIZE ROD SIZE 
(inches) (inches) 
1-4 5% 
5-8 А 
10—12 % 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


313.7 Gas Piping. Gas piping shall be supported by metal 
straps or hooks at intervals not to exceed those shown in 
Table 1210.3.5.1. 

313.8 [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Refer to Title 24, Part 2 of the 
California Building Code for seismic anchorage and bracing 
requirements and accommodations for building displace- 
ments. 


314.0 Trenching, Excavation, and Backfill. 


314.1 Trenches. Trenches deeper than the footing of a 
building or structure, and paralleling the same, shall be 
located not less than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) from the bottom 
exterior edge of the footing, or as approved in accordance 
with Section 301.0. 


314.2 Tunneling and Driving. Tunneling and driving shall 
be permitted to be done in yards, courts, or driveways of a 
building site. Where sufficient depth is available to permit, 
tunnels shall be permitted to be used between open-cut 
trenches. 


Tunnels shall have a clear height of 2 feet (610 mm) 
above the pipe and shall be limited in length to one-half the 
depth of the trench, with a maximum length of 8 feet (2438 
mm). Where pipes are driven, the drive pipe shall be not less 
than one size larger than the pipe to be laid. 


314.3 Open Trenches. Excavations required to be made 
for the installation of a building drainage system or part 
thereof, within the walls of a building, shall be open trench 
work and shall be kept open until the piping has been 
inspected, tested, and accepted. 


314.4 Excavations. Excavations shall be completely back- 
filled as soon after inspection as practicable. Precaution shall 
be taken to ensure compactness of backfill around piping 
without damage to such piping. Trenches shall be backfilled 
in thin layers to 12 inches (305 mm) above the top of the pip- 
ing with clean earth, which shall not contain stones, boulders, 
cinder fill, frozen earth, construction debris, or other materi- 
als that will damage or break the piping or cause corrosive 
action. Mechanical devices such as bulldozers, graders, etc., 
shall be permitted to be then used to complete backfill to 
grade. Fill shall be properly compacted. Precautions shall be 
taken to ensure permanent stability for pipe laid in filled or 
made ground. 


Underground thermoplastic pipe and fittings for sewers 
and other gravity flow applications shall be installed in accor- 
dance with this code and Section 314.4.1. 


53 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


314.4.1 Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe and 
Fittings. Trench width for thermoplastic sewer pipe 
shall be not less than 1.25 times the outside diameter of 
the piping plus 12 inches (305 mm) or the outside diam- 
eter of the piping plus not less than 16 inches (406 mm). 
Thermoplastic piping shall be bedded in not less than 4 
inches (102 mm) of granular fill supporting the piping. 
The backfill for thermoplastic piping shall be compacted 
along the sides of the piping in 6 inch (152 mm) layers 
and continue to not less than 12 inches (305 mm) above 
the piping. Compaction shall be not less than an 85 per- 
cent standard proctor density. 


315.0 Joints and Connections. 


315.1 Unions. Approved unions shall be permitted to be 
used in drainage piping where accessibly located in the trap 
seal or between a fixture and its trap; in the vent system, 
except underground or in wet vents; at any point in the water 
supply system; and in gas piping as permitted by Section 
1212.6. 

315.2 Prohibited Joints and Connections. A fitting or 
connection that has an enlargement, chamber, or recess with 
a ledge, shoulder, or reduction of pipe area that offers an 
obstruction to flow through the drain shall be prohibited. 


316.0 Increasers and Reducers. 


316.1 General. Where different sizes of pipes and fittings 
are to be connected, the proper size increasers or reducers or 
reducing fittings shall be used between the two sizes. Copper 
alloy or cast-iron body cleanouts shall not be used as a 
reducer or adapter from cast-iron drainage pipe to iron pipe 
size (IPS) pipe. 


317.0 Food-Handling Establishments. 


317.1 General. Food or drink shall not be stored, prepared, 
or displayed beneath soil or drainpipes unless those areas are 
protected against leakage or condensation from such pipes 
reaching the food or drink as described below. Where build- 
ing design requires that soil or drainpipes be located over such 
areas, the installation shall be made with the least possible 
number of joints and shall be installed to connect to the near- 
est adequately sized vertical stack with the provisions as fol- 
lows: 

(1) Openings through floors over such areas shall be sealed 
watertight to the floor construction. 

(2) Floor and shower drains installed above such areas shall 
be equipped with integral seepage pans. 

(3) Soil or drainpipes shall be of an approved material as 
listed in Chapter 17 and Section 701.2. Materials shall 
comply with established standards. Cleanouts shall be 
extended through the floor construction above. 

(4) Piping subject to operation at temperatures that will form 
condensation on the exterior of the pipe shall be ther- 
mally insulated. 

(5) Where pipes are installed in ceilings above such areas, 
the ceiling shall be of the removable type or shall be pro- 


54 


vided with access panels to form a ready access for 
inspection of piping. 


318.0 Test Gauges. 

318.1 General. Tests in accordance with this code, which 
are performed utilizing dial gauges, shall be limited to gauges 
having the following pressure graduations or incrementations. 
318.2 Pressure Tests (10 psi or less). Required pres- 
sure tests of 10 pounds-force per square inch (psi) (69 kPa) or 
less shall be performed with gauges of 0.10 psi (0.69 kPa) 
incrementation or less. 

318.3 Pressure Tests (greater than 10 psi to 100 psi). 
Required pressure tests exceeding 10 psi (69 kPa) but less 
than or equal to 100 psi (689 kPa) shall be performed with 
gauges of 1 psi (7 kPa) incrementation or less. 

318.4 Pressure Tests (exceeding 100 psi). Required 
pressure tests exceeding 100 psi (689 kPa) shall be performed 
with gauges incremented for 2 percent or less of the required 
test pressure. 

318.5 Pressure Range. Test gauges shall have a pressure 
range not exceeding twice the test pressure applied. 


319.0 Medical Gas and Vacuum Systems. 


319.1 General. Such piping shall be in accordance with the | 
requirements of Chapter 13. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall require evidence of the competency of the installers 
and verifiers. 


320.0 Rehabilitation of Piping Systems. 


320.1 General. Where pressure piping systems are rehabil- 
itated using an epoxy lining system, it shall be in accordance 
with ASTM F2831. 


321.0 Essential Plumbing Provisions. [OSHPD 1, 2, 3 
(Surgical Clinics), 4 & 5] During periods of power out- 
ages essential electrical power shall be provided for the fol- 
lowing equipment: 

(1) Domestic water booster pumps. 

(2) Domestic hot water circulating pumps. 

(3) Sewage ejector pumps. 

(4) Sump pumps and drainage pumps. 

(5) Domestic water heating equipment and their controls. 
(6) Fuel pumps. 

(7) Grease removal devices requiring electrical power. 

(8) Domestic hot water high temperature alarm. 


322.0 Psychiatric Services. [OSHPD 1, 2, 4 & 5] For 
projects associated with provision of psychiatric services in 
acute psychiatric hospitals, general acute care hospitals, and 
special treatment program service units in skilled nursing 
facilities, special design considerations for injury and suicide 
prevention shall be given to shower, bath, toilet, and sink 
plumbing fixtures. Shower heads shall be of flush-mounted 
design to minimize anchor points. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


323.0 Plumbing Equipment Schedules. [OSHPD 1,2, 
3, 4 & 5] Plumbing equipment schedules shall clearly indi- 
cate which equipment will be on essential power or appro- 
priate special seismic certifications. 


TABLE 313.3 


HANGERS AND SUPPORTS 


GENERAL REGULATIONS 


MATERIALS 


TYPES OF JOINTS 


HORIZONTAL 


VERTICAL 


Cast 


Lead and Oakum 


5 feet, except 10 feet where 10 foot 
lengths are installed! 22 


Base and each floor, 
not to exceed 15 feet 


Compression Gasket 


Every other joint, unless over 4 feet 
then support each joint! ^? 


Base and each floor, 
not to exceed 15 feet 


Cast-Iron Hubless 


Shielded Coupling 


Every other joint, unless over 4 feet 
then support each joint! 22^ 


Base and each floor, 
not to exceed 15 feet 


8 feet; 1% inches and larger, 10 feet 


Copper & Copper Soldered, Brazed, Threaded, or 1% inches and smaller, 6 feet; 5 
Alloys Mechanical 2 inches and larger, 10 feet Each Hoot, nouo exceed 10 Test 
Steel Pipe for Water or 3⁄4 inch and smaller, 10 feet; Every other floor, 
DWV Тиеайей ог Welded 1 inch and larger, 12 feet not to exceed 25 feet? 

1 5 УЕ : Ve .341 : 
Steel Pipe for Gas Threaded or Welded /^ inch, 6 feet; 74 inch and 1 inch, /^ inch, 6 feet; 74 inch and 1 inch, 


8 feet; 1 MI inches every floor level 


Schedule 40 PVC and 
ABS DWV 


Solvent Cemented 


All sizes, 4 feet; allow 
for expansion every 30 feet? 


Base and each floor; provide 
mid-story guides; provide 
for expansion every 30 feet 


CPVC 


Solvent Cemented 


] inch and smaller, 3 feet; 
1% inches and larger, 4 feet 


Base and each floor; 
provide mid-story guides 


CPVC-AL-CPVC 


Solvent Cemented 


l^ inch, 5 feet; 34 inch, 65 inches; 
] inch, 6 feet 


Base and each floor; 
provide mid-story guides 


(metal threads only), or 
mechanical 


1% inches and larger, 4 feet 


Lead Wiped or Burned Continuous Support Not to exceed 4 feet 
Steel Mechanical In accordance with standards acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
PEX Cold Expansion, Insert ] inch and smaller, 32 inches; Base and each floor; 
and Compression 1% inches and larger, 4 feet provide mid-story guides 
l^ inch ; 
PEX-AL-PEX Metal Insert and Metal 3, inch АП sizes 98 inches Base and each floor; 
Compression 1 inch provide mid-story guides 
Metal Insert and Metal %2 inch Base and each floor; 
PE-AL-PE : 3⁄4 inch All sizes 98 inches А : А 
Сотргеѕѕіоп 1 inch provide mid-story guides 
- ] inch and smaller, 32 inches; Base and each floor; 
PERT Insert arid Compression 1% inches and larger, 4 feet provide mid-story guides 
Fusion weld (socket, butt, sad- 
Polypropylene (PP) dle, electrofusion), threaded ] inch and smaller, 32 inches; Base and each floor; 


provide mid-story guides 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


Notes: 


: Support adjacent to joint, not to exceed 18 inches (457 mm). 


? Brace not to exceed 40 foot (12 192 mm) intervals to prevent horizontal movement. 


3 Support at each horizontal branch connection. 


2 Hangers shall not be placed on the coupling. 


5 Vertical water lines shall be permitted to be supported in accordance with recognized engineering principles with regard to expansion and contraction, where 
first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


55 


56 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 4 - PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


Adopting Agency 


BSC 


BSC- 
CC 


SFM 


DSA 


OSHPD 


2 |1-AC 


AC 


SS | SS/CC 


1R 


2 


3 


4 


BSCC 


DPH 


AGR 


DWR 


CEC 


CA 


SL 


SLC 


Adopt Entire Chapter 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


Note Under Chapter Title 


401.3 


403.1 


403.2 


403.3 


407.2 


407.2.1 


407.2.2 


407.2.3 


407.2.4 


“жж ж 


407.2.4.1 


408.3 


> 


408.3.1 


408.3.2 


“= x ж 


“= X ж 


408.6 


408.7 Exception 1 


411.2 


411.2.2 


“| x ж 


411.2.2.1 


411.2.3 


411.2.4 


< 


412.1 


412.1.1 


412.1.2 


412.1.3 


2 2 X £X ж 


412.1.4.1 


2 X M 


413.2 


415.1 


417.1.1 


417.1.2 


(2 


X 


420.2.1 


420.2.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


57 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 4 - PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS (continued) 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 

Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
| 1|2 ТАС АС |55 |55/СС 1 182131415 6 

Adopt Entire Chapter x 

Adopt Entire Chapter as 

amended (amended X XX X X ХХХ Ххх x | xX x 

sections listed below) 

СЕ 3r х 

Chapter/Section 

422.1 X XIX X X 

422.1 Exception X X 

Table 422.1 X XX X Хх X XXI X X 

422.1.1 X X 

422.1.3 X 

422.1.4 X XX X X 

422.2 Tit 

422.2 Exceptions T 141101 

422.2 Exception (4) X X 

422.3.1 & Exception X XIX XX XIX 

422.4 71 T 77111 

422.5 tit 

422.6 Exception (3) X X 

422.7 Exception (2) X X 

422.8 X 

422.9 X 

422.10 X 

422.11 X 

Table 4-1 X X 

Table 4-2 X XIX X X 

Table 4-3 X 

Table 4-4 X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


58 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 4 
PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


Note: In addition to the requirements of this chapter, buildings or facilities where accessibility is required for applications listed in 

California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2 (California Building Code), Chapter 1, Section 1.9.1 regulated by the Division of 
the State Architect-Access Compliance shall also comply with Title 24, Part 2 , Chapter 11A or 11B, as applicable under authority 
cited by CA Government Code Section 4450 and in reference cited by CA Government Code Sections 4450 through 4461, 12955. 1 (c), 

and CA Health and Safety Code Sections 18949.1, 19952 through 19959. 


401.0 General. 
401.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materials 
and installation of plumbing fixtures, including faucets and 
fixture fittings, and the minimum number of plumbing fix- 
tures required based on occupancy. 
401.2 Quality of Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall be con- 
structed of dense, durable, non-absorbent materials and shall 
have smooth, impervious surfaces, free from unnecessary 
concealed fouling surfaces. 
401.3 Water-Conserving Fixtures and Fittings. 

|| Note 1: [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] Flow rates for specified 


plumbing fixtures for mandatory nonresidential construction 
are contained in Chapter 5, Division 5.3 of the California 
Green Building Standards Code (Part 11, Title 24, Califor- 
nia Code of Regulations - CALGreen). Scoping provisions 
applicable to nonresidential additions and alterations are 
contained in Section 301.3 of CAL Green. 

|| Note 2: [BSC-CG] On and afier January 1, 2014, certain 
commercial real property, as defined in Civil Code Section 
1101.3, shall have its noncompliant plumbing fixtures 
replaced with appropriate water-conserving plumbing fix- 
tures under specific circumstances. See Civil Code Section 
1101.1 et seq. for definitions, types of commercial real prop- 
erty affected, effective dates, circumstances necessitating 
replacement of noncompliant plumbing fixtures, and duties 
and responsibilities for ensuring compliance. 
[HCD-1] All noncompliant plumbing fixtures in any residen- 
tial real property shall be replaced with water-conserving 
plumbing fixtures. Plumbing fixture replacement is required 
prior to issuance of a certificate of final completion, certificate 
of occupancy, or final permit approval by the local building 
department. See Civil Code Section 1101.1, et seq., for the def- 
inition of a noncompliant plumbing fixture, types of residential 
buildings affected and other important enactment dates. 
Note 3: [OSHPD 1, 2, 3 & 4] Also refer to Title 20, Cali- 
fornia Code of Regulations, Division 2, Chapter 4, Article 4, 
Section 1605.3 (i). 
Note 4: Appliance Efficiency Regulations — Water Effi- 
ciency. [CEC] Where California law in Title 20 Sections 
1601 et seq. applying to water-using appliances sold or 
offered for sale within the state specifies a lower maximum 

|| flow rate than specified in Section 407.2, 408.3, or 411.2, the 
lower maximum flow rate shall be required. 


402.0 Installation. 


402.1 Cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in a 
manner to afford easy access for repairs and cleaning. Pipes 
from fixtures shall be run to the nearest wall. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


402.2 Joints. Where a fixture comes in contact with the wall 
or floor, the joint between the fixture and the wall or floor 
shall be made watertight. 


402.3 Securing Fixtures. Floor-outlet or floor-mounted 
fixtures shall be rigidly secured to the drainage connection and 
to the floor, where so designed, by screws or bolts of copper, 
copper alloy, or other equally corrosion-resistant material. 


402.4 Wall-Hung Fixtures. Wall-hung fixtures shall be 
rigidly supported by metal supporting members so that no 
strain is transmitted to the connections. Floor-affixed supports 
for off-the-floor plumbing fixtures for public use shall comply 
with ASME A112.6.1M. Framing-affixed supports for off-the- 
floor water closets with concealed tanks shall comply with 
ASME A112.6.2. Flush tanks and similar appurtenances shall 
be secured by approved non-corrosive screws or bolts. 


402.5 Setting. Fixtures shall be set level and in proper align- 
ment with reference to adjacent walls. No water closet or 
bidet shall be set closer than 15 inches (381 mm) from its cen- 
ter to a side wall or obstruction or closer than 30 inches (762 
mm) center to center to a similar fixture. The clear space in 
front of a water closet, lavatory, or bidet shall be not less than 
24 inches (610 mm). No urinal shall be set closer than 12 
inches (305 mm) from its center to a side wall or partition or 
closer than 24 inches (610 mm) center to center. 


Exception: The installation of paper dispensers or accessi- 
bility grab bars shall not be considered obstructions. 


402.6 Flanged Fixture Connections. Fixture connec- 
tions between drainage pipes and water closets, floor outlet 
service sinks and urinals shall be made using an approved 
copper alloy, hard lead, ABS, PVC, or iron flanges caulked, 
soldered, solvent cemented; rubber compression gaskets; or 
screwed to the drainage pipe. The connection shall be bolted 
with an approved gasket, washer, or setting compound 
between the fixture and the connection. The bottom of the 
flange shall be set on the top of the finished floor. I 


Wall-mounted water closet fixtures shall be securely 
bolted to an approved carrier fitting. The approved carrier fit- 
ting shall be securely attached to the structure. The connect- 
ing pipe between the carrier fitting and the fixture shall be an 
approved material and designed to accommodate an ade- 
quately sized gasket. Gasket material shall be neoprene, felt, 
or similar approved types. 

402.6.1 Closet Rings (Closet Flanges). Closet 

rings (closet flanges) for water closets or similar fixtures 

shall be of an approved type and shall be copper alloy, 
copper, hard lead, cast-iron, galvanized malleable iron, 


59 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


ABS, PVC, or other approved materials. Closet rings 
(closet flanges) shall be approximately 7 inches (178 
mm) in diameter and, where installed, shall, together 
with the soil pipe, present a 1 inch (38 mm) wide flange 
or face to receive the fixture gasket or closet seal. 


Caulked-on closet rings (closet flanges) shall be not 
less than М of an inch (6.4 mm) thick and not less than 2 
inches (51 mm) in overall depth. 


Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be burned or sol- 
dered to lead bends or stubs, shall be caulked to cast-iron 
soil pipe, shall be solvent cemented to ABS and PVC, 
and shall be screwed or fastened in an approved manner 
to other materials. 


Closet bends or stubs shall be cut-off to present a 
smooth surface even with the top ofthe closet ring before 
the rough inspection is called. 


Closet rings (closet flanges) shall be adequately 
designed and secured to support fixtures connected 
thereto. 


402.6.2 Securing Closet Flanges. Closet screws, 
bolts, washers, and similar fasteners shall be of copper 
alloy, copper, or other listed equally corrosion-resistant 
materials. Screws and bolts shall be ofa size and number 
to properly support the fixture installed. 


402.6.3 Securing Floor-Mounted, Back-Outlet 
Water Closet Bowls. Floor-mounted, back-outlet 
water closet bowls shall be set level with an angle of 90 
degrees (1.57 rad) between the floor and wall at the cen- 
terline of the fixture outlet. The floor and wall shall have 
a flat mounting surface not less than 5 inches (127 mm) 
to the right and left of the fixture outlet centerline. The 
closet flange shall be secured to the wall mounting sur- 
face. Offset, eccentric, or reducing closet flanges shall 
not be permitted with these fixtures. 


The fixture shall be secured to the wall outlet flange 
or drainage connection and the floor by corrosion-resis- 
tant screws or bolts. 


402.7 Supply Fittings. The supply lines and fittings for 
every plumbing fixture shall be so installed as to prevent 
backflow in accordance with Chapter 6. 


402.8 Installation. Fixtures shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


402.9 Design and Installation of Plumbing Fixtures. 
Plumbing fixtures shall be installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. The means of back- 
flow prevention shall not be compromised by the designated 
fixture fitting mounting surface. 


402.10 Slip Joint Connections. Fixtures having con- 
cealed slip joint connections shall be provided with an access 
panel or utility space not less than 12 inches (305 mm) in its 
least dimension and so arranged without obstructions as to 
make such connections accessible for inspection and repair. 


402.11 Future Fixtures. Where provisions are made for the 
future installation of fixtures, those provided for shall be con- 
sidered in determining the required sizes of the drain and water 
supply piping. Construction for future installations shall be ter- 
minated with a plugged fitting or fittings. Where the plugged 


60 


fitting is at the point where the trap of a fixture is installed, the 
plumbing system for such fixture shall be complete and be in 
accordance with the plumbing requirements of this code. 


403.0 Accessible Plumbing Facilities. 


403.1 General. Where accessible facilities are required in 
applicable building regulations, the facilities shall be installed 
in accordance with those regulations. [HCD 1-AC] For spe- 
cific requirements regarding accommodations for persons with 
disabilities, see Chapter 11A of the California Building Code. 


403.2 Fixtures and Fixture Fittings for Persons with 
Disabilities. Plumbing fixtures and fixture fittings for per- 
sons with disabilities shall be in accordance with ICC A117.1 
and the applicable standards referenced in Chapter 4. [HCD 
1-AC] Specific requirements regarding accommodations for 
persons with disabilities are contained in Chapter 11A of the 
California Building Code. 


403.3 Exposed Pipes and Surfaces. Water supply and 
drainpipes under accessible lavatories and sinks shall be insu- 
lated or otherwise be configured to protect against contact. Pro- 
tectors, insulators, or both shall comply with ASME A112.18.9 
or ASTM C1822. [HCD 1-AC] Specific requirements regard- 
ing accommodations for persons with disabilities are contained 
in Chapter 11A of the California Building Code. 


404.0 Waste Fittings and Overflows. 


404.1 Waste Fittings. Waste fittings shall comply with 
ASME A112.18.2/CSA B125.2, ASTM F409 or Table 701.2 
for aboveground drainage piping and fittings. 


404.2 Overflows. Where a fixture is provided with an over- 
flow, the overflow shall comply with Section 404.2.1 or Sec- 
tion 404.2.2. 


404.2.1 Sinks, Lavatories, and Bathtubs. The waste 
shall be so arranged that the standing water in the fixture 
shall not rise in the overflow where the stopper is closed 
or remain in the overflow where the fixture is empty. The 
overflow pipe from a fixture shall be connected to the 
house or inlet side of the fixture trap. 


404.2.2 Water Closets and Urinals. Overflows on 
flush tanks shall be permitted to discharge into the water 
closets or urinals served by them. 


405.0 Prohibited Fixtures. 


405.1 Prohibited Water Closets. Water closets having an 
invisible seal or an unventilated space or having walls which 
are not thoroughly washed at each discharge shall be prohib- 
ited. A water closet that might permit siphonage of the con- 
tents of the bowl back into the tank shall be prohibited. 


405.2 Prohibited Urinals. Trough urinals and urinals with 
an invisible seal shall be prohibited. 


405.3 Miscellaneous Fixtures. Fixed wooden, or tile wash 
sinks for domestic use shall not be installed in a building I 
designed or used for human habitation. No sheet metal-lined 
wooden bathtub shall be installed or reconnected. No dry or 
chemical closet (toilet) shall be installed in a building used for 
human habitation unless first approved by the Health Officer. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


406.0 Special Fixtures and Specialties. 


406.1 Water and Waste Connections. Baptisteries, orna- 
mental and lily ponds, aquaria, ornamental fountain basins, 
and similar fixtures and specialties requiring water, waste 
connections, or both shall be submitted for approval to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction prior to installation. 


406.2 Special Use Sinks. Restaurant kitchen and other 
special use sinks shall be permitted to be made of approved- 
type bonderized and galvanized sheet steel of not less than 
No. 16 U.S. gauge (0.0635 inches) (1.6 mm). Sheet-metal 
plumbing fixtures shall be adequately designed, constructed, 
and braced in an approved manner to accomplish their 
intended purpose. 


406.3 Special Use Fixtures. Special use fixtures shall be 
made of one of the following: 


(1) Soapstone 

(2) Chemical stoneware 

(3) Copper-based alloy 

(4) Nickel-based alloy 

(5) Corrosion-resistant steel 

(6) Other materials suited for the intended use of the fixture 


406.4 Zinc Alloy Components. Zinc alloy components 
shall comply with applicable nationally recognized standards 
and shall be used in accordance with their listing. 


407.0 Lavatories. 


407.1 Application. Lavatories shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.1/CSA 845.2, ASME A112.19.2/CSA 845.1, 
ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, ASME A112.19.12, CSA 
В45.5ЛАРМО 7124, CSA B45.8/IAPMO 7403, CSA 
В45.11ЛАРМО Z401 or CSA В45.12ЛАРМО Z402. Group 
wash fixtures shall comply with the requirements of Section 
401.2. Every 20 inches (508 mm) of rim space of a group wash 
fixture shall be considered as one lavatory for determining the 
number of lavatories required in accordance with Table 422.1. 
Lavatory assemblies with automatic soap dispensers, faucets, 
or hand dryers shall comply with IAPMO IGC 127. 


407.2 Water Consumption. The maximum water flow rate 
of faucets shall comply with Section 407.2.1 through Section 
407.2.4. 


4072.1 Public Lavatory Faucets. The maximum 
flow rate for public lavatory faucets shall not exceed 0.5 
gpm at 60 psi (1.9 L/m at 414 kPa). 


4072.2 Residential Lavatory Faucets. [HCD 1] The 
maximum flow rate of residential lavatory faucets shall 
not exceed 1.2 gallons (4.54 L) per minute at 60 psi. The 
minimum flow rate of residential lavatory faucets shall 
not be less than 0.8 gallons (3.03 L) per minute at 20 psi. 


4072.3 Lavatory Faucets іп Common and Public 
Use Areas. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] The maximum flow rate 
of lavatory faucets, installed in common and public use 
areas (outside of dwellings or sleeping units) in residen- 
tial buildings, shall not exceed 0.5 gallons (1.89 L) per 
minute at 60 psi. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


4072.4 Metering Faucets. Metered faucets shall 
deliver a maximum of 0.2 gallons (0.76 L) per metering 
cycle. 


407.2.4.1 Metering Faucets. [BSC-CG & DSA- | 
SS] Metering Faucets shall not deliver more than 
0.20 gallons (0.76 L) per cycle in compliance with 
Chapter 5, Division 5.3 of the California Green 
Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 


407.3 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature for Public 
Lavatories. Hot water delivered from public-use lavatories 
shall be limited to a maximum temperature of 120°F (49°C). 
The maximum temperature shall be regulated by one of the 
following means: 


(1) A limiting device conforming to either ASSE 
1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70, or 


(2) A water heater conforming to ASSE 1084. 


407.4 Transient Public Lavatories. Self-closing or meter- 
ing faucets shall be installed on lavatories intended to serve the 
transient public, such as those in, but not limited to service sta- 
tions, train stations, airports, restaurants, and convention halls. 


407.5 Waste Outlet. Lavatories shall have a waste outlet 
and fixture tailpiece not less than 1/4 inches (32 mm) in diam- 
eter. Continuous wastes and fixture tailpieces shall be con- 
structed from the materials specified in Section 701.4. Waste 
outlets shall be provided with an approved stopper or strainer. 


407.6 Overflow. Where overflows are provided, they shall 
be installed in accordance with Section 404.2. 


408.0 Showers. 


408.1 Application. Manufactured shower receptors and 
shower bases shall comply with ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, 
ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.3/CSABA5 4, 
CSA В45.12ЛАРМО 7402, or CSA В45.5ЛАРМО Z124. Pre- 
fabricated shower enclosures shall comply with IAPMO IGC 
154. 


408.2 Tileable Shower Receptors. Tileable shower recep- 
tors and shower kits shall comply with IAPMO PS 106. 


408.3 Water Consumption. Showerheads shall have a « 
maximum flow rate of not more than /.8 gpm at 80 psi (6.8/ 
L/m at 552 kPa). Body sprays shall have a flow rate of not 
more than /.8 gpm at 80 psi (6.87 L/m at 552 kPa). [HCD 1] 
Residential showerheads shall comply with Division 4.3 of 
the California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 
Residential body sprays shall comply with the showerhead | 


requirements in Division 4.3 of CALGreen. [BSC-CG & 
DSA-SS] Nonresidential body sprays shall comply with the 
showerhead requirements in Division 5.3 of CALGreen. 


408.3.1 Single Showerhead. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] || 
Showerheads shall have a maximum flow rate of not 
more than 1.8 gallons (6.81 L) per minute at 80 psi. 
Showerheads shall be certified to the performance crite- 
ria of the U.S. EPA WaterSense Specification for Show- 
erheads in compliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3. of 
the California Green Building Standards Code (CAL- 
Green). 


61 


» 


» 


» 


» 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


408.3.2 Multiple Showerheads Serving One 
Shower. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] When a shower is served 
by more than one showerhead, the combined flow rate of 
all showerheads and/or other shower outlets controlled by 
a single valve shall not exceed 1.8 gallons (6.81 L) per 
minute at 80 psi, or the shower shall be designed to allow 
only one shower outlet to be in operation at a time in com- 
pliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3 of the California 
Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 


Note: A hand-held shower shall be considered a show- 
erhead. 


408.4 Individual Shower and Tub-Shower Combina- 
tion Control Valves. Showers and tub-shower combinations 
shall be provided with individual control valves of the pressure 
balance, thermostatic, or combination pressure balance/ther- 
mostatic mixing valve type that provide scald and thermal 
shock protection for the rated flow rate of the installed show- 
erhead. These valves shall be installed at the point of use and 
comply with ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16 or 
ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 


408.4.1 Gang Showers. Where gang showers are sup- 
plied with a single temperature-controlled water supply 
pipe, it shall be controlled by a mixing valve that com- 
plies with ASSE 1069. 


408.4.2 Temperature Limiting. The maximum water 
temperature discharging from an individual showerhead 
shall be limited to 120°F (49°C) by one of the following 
methods: 


(1) A shower or tub/shower combination valve con- 
forming to ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA 
B125.16 where either: 


(a) The valve is field-adjusted to the required max- 
imum temperature, or 


(b) The handle position, stop, or temperature limit- 
ing control is set in accordance with the manu- 
facturer’s instructions to the required maximum 
temperature. 


(2) For gang showers supplied by a single water supply 
pipe, a mixing valve that conforms to ASSE 1069 
that is field-adjusted to the required maximum tem- 
perature. 


408.4.3 Temperature-Actuated, Flow-Reduction 
Devices for Individual Fixture Fittings. Tempera- 
ture-actuated, flow-reduction devices, where installed for 
individual fixture fittings, shall comply with ASSE 1062. 
Such devices shall not be used alone as a substitute for 
the balanced pressure, thermostatic or combination 
shower valves requirements or as a substitute for bathtub 
or whirlpool tub water temperature-limiting valves 
requirements. 


408.5 Waste Outlet. Showers shall have a waste outlet and 
fixture tailpiece not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter. 
Fixture tailpieces shall be constructed from the materials 
specified in Section 701.2 for drainage piping. Strainers serv- 
ing shower drains shall comply with ASME A112.18.2/CSA 
B125.2. 


62 


408.6 Finished Curb or Threshold. Where a shower < 


receptor has a finished dam, curb, or threshold, it shall be not 
less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) lower than the sides and back of 
such receptor. In no case, shall a dam or threshold be less than 
2 inches (51 mm) or exceeding 9 inches (229 mm) in depth 
where measured from the top of the dam or threshold to the 
top of the drain. Each such receptor shall be provided with a 
nailing flange either integral or field installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions. The flange 
shall be watertight and extend vertically not less than 1 inch 
(25.4 mm) above the top of the sides of the receptor. The fin- 
ished floor of the receptor shall slope uniformly from the 
sides towards the drain not less than % inch per foot (10.4 
mm/m), nor more than % inch per foot (41.6 mm/m). 


Thresholds shall be of sufficient width to accommodate 
a minimum 22 inch (559 mm) door. Shower doors shall open 
so as to maintain not less than a 22 inch (559 mm) unob- 
structed opening for egress. Where there is a shower without 
a threshold, the floor space within the same room shall be 
considered a wet location and shall comply with the require- 
ments of the California Building Code, California Residential 
Code, and California Electrical Code. 


Exceptions: 
(1) Showers in accordance with Section 403.2. 


(2) А cast-iron shower receptor flange shall be not less than 
0.3 of an inch (7.62 mm) in height. 


(3) For flanges not used as a means of securing, the sealing 
flange shall be not less than 0.3 of an inch (7.62 mm) in 
height. 


408.7 Shower Compartments. Shower compartments 
shall have a finished interior in accordance with the follow- 
ing: 

(1) Not less than 1024 square inches (0.6606 m°). 

(2) Be capable of encompassing a 30 inch (762 mm) circle. 


The minimum required area and dimensions shall be 
measured at a height equal to the top of the threshold and a 
point tangent to its centerline. The area and dimensions shall 
be maintained to a point of not less than 70 inches (1778 mm) 
above the shower drain outlet with no protrusions other than 
the fixture valve or valves, showerheads, soap dishes, shelves, 
and safety grab bars, or rails. Fold-down seats in accessible 
shower stalls shall be permitted to protrude into the 30 inch 
(762 mm) circle. 


Exceptions: 
(1) Showers that are designed to be in accordance with 
Chapter 11A of the California Building Code. 


(2) The minimum required area and dimension shall not 
apply for a shower receptor having overall dimensions 
of not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width and 60 
inches (1524 mm) in length. 


« 


408.8 Lining for Showers and Receptors. Shower (4 


receptors built on-site shall be watertight and shall be con- 
structed from approved-type dense, nonabsorbent, and non- 
corrosive materials. Each such receptor shall be adequately 
reinforced, shall be provided with an approved flanged floor 
drain designed to make a watertight joint on the floor, and 
shall have smooth, impervious, and durable surfaces. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


» 


» 


» 


Shower receptors shall have the subfloor and rough side 
of walls to a height of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) above 
the top of the finished dam or threshold shall be first lined 
with sheet plastic, lead, or copper, or shall be lined with other 
durable and watertight materials. Showers that are provided 
with a built in place, permanent seat or seating area that is 
located within the shower enclosure, shall be first lined with 
sheet plastic, lead, copper, or shall be lined with other durable 
and watertight materials that extend not less than 3 inches (76 
mm) above horizontal surfaces of the seat or the seating area. 


Lining materials shall be pitched 4 inch per foot (20.8 
mm/m) to weep holes in the subdrain of a smooth and solidly 
formed subbase. Such lining materials shall extend upward on 
the rough jambs of the shower opening to a point not less than 
3 inches (76 mm) above the horizontal surfaces of the seat or 
the seating area, the top of the finished dam or threshold and 
shall extend outward over the top of the permanent seat, per- 
manent seating area, or rough threshold and be turned over 
and fastened on the outside face of both the permanent seat, 
permanent seating area, or rough threshold and the jambs. 


Nonmetallic shower subpans or linings shall be permitted 
to be built up on the job site of not less than three layers of stan- 
dard grade 15 pound (6.8 kg) asphalt impregnated roofing felt. 
The bottom layer shall be fitted to the formed subbase and each 
succeeding layer thoroughly hot-mopped to that below. Cor- 
ners shall be carefully fitted and shall be made strong and 
watertight by folding or lapping, and each corner shall be rein- 
forced with suitable webbing hot-mopped in place. 


Folds, laps, and reinforcing webbing shall extend not less 
than 4 inches (102 mm) in all directions from the corner, and 
webbing shall be of approved type and mesh, producing a ten- 
sile strength of not less than 50 pounds per square foot (Ib/ft’) 
(244 kg/m?) in either direction. Nonmetallic shower subpans 
or linings shall be permitted to consist of multilayers of other 
approved equivalent materials suitably reinforced and care- 
fully fitted in place on the job site as elsewhere required in 
this section. 


Linings shall be properly recessed and fastened to the 
approved backing so as not to occupy the space required for 
the wall covering, and shall not be nailed or perforated at a 
point that is less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) above the finished dam 
or threshold. An approved type subdrain shall be installed with 
a shower subpan or lining. Each such subdrain shall be of the 
type that sets flush with the subbase and shall be equipped 
with a clamping ring or other device to make a tight connec- 
tion between the lining and the drain. The subdrain shall have 
weep holes into the waste line. The weep holes located in the 
subdrain clamping ring shall be protected from clogging. 

408.8.1 PVC Sheets. Plasticized polyvinyl chloride 

(PVC) sheets shall conform to ASTM D4551. Sheets 

shall be joined by solvent cementing in accordance with 

the manufacturer's installation instructions. 

408.8.2 Chlorinated Polyethylene (CPE) Sheets. 

Nonplasticized chlorinated polyethylene sheets shall con- 

form to ASTM D4068. The liner shall be joined in accor- 

dance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 

408.8.3 Sheet Lead. Sheet lead shall weigh not less 

than 4 Ib/ft? (19.5 kg/m?) and shall be coated with an 

asphalt paint or other approved coating. The lead sheet 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


shall be insulated from conducting substances, other than 
the connecting drain, by 15 pound (6.8 kg) asphalt felt 
or an equivalent. Sheet lead shall be joined by burning. 
408.8.4 Sheet Copper. Sheet copper shall comply with 
ASTM 8152 and shall weigh not less than 12 ounces per 
square foot (oz/ft?) (3.7 kg/m?) or No. 24 B & S Gauge 
(0.02 inches) (0.51 mm). The copper sheet shall be insu- 
lated from conducting substances, other than the connect- 
ing drain, by 15 pound (6.8 kg) asphalt felt or an equivalent. 
Sheet copper shall be joined by brazing or soldering. 


408.8.5 Tests for Shower Receptors. Shower recep- 
tors shall be tested for watertightness by filling with 
water to a depth of not less than 2 inches (51 mm) for 
not less than 15 minutes. Where no threshold is present, 
а 2 inch (51 mm) barrier shall be temporarily constructed 
for testing. The test plug shall be so placed that both 
upper and under sides of the subpan shall be subjected 
to the test at the point where it is clamped to the drain. 


408.9 Public Shower Floors. Floors of public shower 
rooms shall have a nonskid surface and shall be drained in such 
a manner that wastewater from one bather shall not pass over 
areas occupied by other bathers. Gutters in public or gang 
shower rooms shall have rounded corners for easy cleaning and 
shall be sloped not less than 2 percent toward drains. Drains in 
gutters shall be spaced at a maximum of 8 feet (2438 mm) from 
sidewalls nor more than 16 feet (4877 mm) apart. 


408.10 Location of Valves and Heads. Control valves 
and showerheads shall be located on the sidewall of shower 
compartments or otherwise arranged so that the showerhead 
does not discharge directly at the entrance to the compartment 
so that the bather can adjust the valves before stepping into 
the shower spray. 


408.11 Water Supply Riser. A water supply riser from the 
shower valve to the showerhead outlet, whether exposed or 
not, shall be securely attached to the structure. 


409.0 Bathtubs and Whirlpool Bathtubs. 


409.1 Application. Bathtubs shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.1/CSA В45.2, ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, 
ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124, or 
CSA B45.12/IAPMO 7402. Whirlpool bathtubs shall com- 
ply with ASME A112.19.7/CSA B45.10. Pressure sealed 
doors within a bathtub or whirlpool bathtub enclosure shall 
comply with ASME A112.19.15. 

409.2 Waste Outlet. Bathtubs and whirlpool bathtubs shall 
have a waste outlet and fixture tailpiece not less than 114 
inches (40 mm) in diameter. Fixture tailpieces shall be con- 
structed from the materials specified in Section 701.2 for 
drainage piping. Waste outlets shall be provided with an 
approved stopper or strainer. 

409.3 Overflow. Where overflows are provided, they shall 
be installed in accordance with Section 404.2. 

409.4 Limitation of Hot Water Temperature in Bath- 
tubs and Whirlpool Bathtubs. The maximum hot water 
temperature discharging from the bathtub and whirlpool bath- 
tub filler shall be limited to 120°F (49°C). The maximum 
temperature shall be regulated by one of the following means: 


63 


« 


« 


« 


« 


« 


» 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


(1) A limiting device conforming to either ASSE 
1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70 or CSA B125.3. 


(2) A water heater conforming to ASSE 1084. 


409.5 Backflow Protection. The water supply to a bathtub 
and whirlpool bathtub filler valve shall be protected by an air 
gap or in accordance with Section 417.0. 


409.6 Installation and Access. Bathtubs and whirlpool 
bathtubs shall be installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. Access openings shall be ofa 
size and opening to permit the removal and replacement of 
the circulation pump. 


Whirlpool pump access located in the crawl space shall 
be located not more than 20 feet (6096 mm) from an access 
door, trap door, or crawl hole. 


The circulation pump shall be located above the crown 
weir of the trap. 


The pump and the circulation piping shall be self-drain- 
ing to minimize water retention. 


409.6.1 Suction Fittings. Suction fittings on 
whirlpool bathtubs shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.7/CSA B45.10. 


409.6.2 Flexible PVC Hoses and Tubing. Flexible 
PVC hoses and tubing intended to be used on whirlpool 
bathtub water circulation systems or pneumatic systems 
shall comply with IAPMO/ANSI Z1033. 


410.0 Bidets. 


410.1 Application. Bidets shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 or ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4. 


410.2 Backflow Protection. The water supply to the bidet 
shall be protected by an air gap or in accordance with Sec- 
tion 603.3.2, Section 603.3.5, or Section 603.3.6. 


410.3 Limitation of Water Temperature in Bidets. The 
maximum hot water temperature discharging from a bidet 
shall be limited to 110°F (43°C). The maximum temperature 
shall be regulated by one of the following means: 


(1) A limiting device conforming to either ASSE 
1070/ASME A112.1070/CSA B125.70 or CSA B125.3. 


(2) A water heater conforming to ASSE 1084. 


411.0 Water Closets. 


411.1 Application. Water closets shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.2/CSA B45.1, ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, or 
CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124. Water closet bowls for public use 
shall be of the elongated type. In nurseries, schools, and other 
similar places where plumbing fixtures are provided for the 
use of children less than 6 years of age, water closets shall be 
of a size and height suitable for children’s use. 

411.2 Water Consumption. The effective flush volume of 
all water closets shall not exceed 1.28 gallons (4.8 L) per 
flush when tested in accordance with ASME A112.19.2/CSA 
B45.1. 


64 


411.2.1 Dual Flush Water Closets. Dual flush water 
closets shall comply with ASME A112.19.14. The effec- 
tive flush volume for dual flush water closets shall be 
defined as the composite, average flush volume of two 
reduced flushes and one full flush. 


411.2.2 Flushometer Valve Activated Water Clos- 
ets. Flushometer valve activated water closets shall have 
a maximum flush volume of /.28 gallons (4.8 Lpf) of 
water per flush. 


411.2.2.1 Flushometer Valve Activated Water 
Closets. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] Flushometer || 
valve activated water closets shall have a maximum 
flush volume of 1.28 gallons (4.8 L) per flush in 
accordance with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1. 


411.2.3 Performance. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Water clos- 
ets installed in residential occupancies shall meet or 
exceed the minimum performance criteria developed for 
certification of high-efficiency toilets under the 
WaterSense program sponsored by the U.S. Environ- 
mental Protection Agency (EPA). 


411.2.4 Water Closets. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] The || 
effective flush volume of all water closets shall not 
exceed 1.28 gallons (4.8 L) per flush. Tank-type water 
closets shall be certified to the performance criteria of 
the U.S. EPA WaterSense Specification for Tank-Type 
Toilets in compliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3. of the 
California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 


411.3 Water Closet Seats. Water closet seats shall be prop- 
erly sized for the water closet bowl type, and shall be of 
smooth, non-absorbent material. Seats, for public use, shall be 
of the elongated type and either of the open front type or have 
an automatic seat cover dispenser. Water closet seats shall be 
provided with or without covers. Plastic seats shall comply 
with IAPMO/ANSI Z124.5. 


411.4 Personal Hygiene Devices. Water closets with 
integral personal hygiene devices shall comply with ASME 
A112.4.2/CSA B45.16. 


412.0 Urinals. 


412.1 Application. Urinals shall comply with ASME 
А112.19.2/СЅА 845.1, ASME А112.19.19, or CSA 
В45.5ЛАРМО 7124. Wall-mounted urinals shall have an 
average water consumption not to exceed 0.125 gallons (0.47 
L) per flush. Other urinals shall have an average water con- 
sumption not to exceed 0.5 gallons (1.89 L) per flush. 


412.1.1 Wall-Mounted Urinals. [BSC-CG & DSA- | 
SS] The effective flush volume of wall-mounted urinals 
shall not exceed 0.125 gallons (0.47 L) per flush in com- 
pliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3, of the California 
Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 

412.1.2 Floor-Mounted Urinals. [BSC-CG & | 
SS] The effective flush volume of floor-mounted or other 
urinals shall not exceed 0.5 gallons (1.89 L) per flush in 


compliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3, of the California 
Green Building Standards Code (CAL Green). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


412.1.3 Nonwater Urinals. Nonwater urinals shall 
have a liquid barrier sealant to maintain a trap seal. Non- 
water urinals shall permit the uninhibited flow of waste 
through the urinal to the sanitary drainage system. Non- 
water urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer's instructions after 
installation. Where nonwater urinals are installed, not 
less than one water supplied fixture rated at not less than 
1 water supply fixture unit (WSFU) shall be installed 
upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line 
flow and rinsing. Where nonwater urinals are installed, 
they shall have a water distribution line rough-in to each 
individual urinal location to allow for the installation of 
an approved backflow prevention device in the event of 
a retrofit. For additional information, see Health and 
Safety Code Section 17921.4. 


412.1.4 Nonwater Urinals with Drain Cleansing 
Action. Nonwater urinals with drain cleansing action 
shall comply with ASME A112.19.19 and shall be 
cleaned, maintained and installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. 


412.1.4.1 [BSC-CG]. Where approved, nonwater 
urinals with drain cleansing action shall be in com- 
pliance with Chapter 5, Division A5.3 of the Cali- 
fornia Green Building Standards Code (CAL Green). 


412.2 Backflow Protection. A water supply to a urinal 
shall be protected by an approved-type vacuum breaker or 
other approved backflow prevention device in accordance 
with Section 603.5. 


413.0 Flushing Devices. 


413.1 Where Required. Each water closet, urinal, clinical 
sink, or other plumbing fixture that depends on trap siphonage 
to discharge its waste contents shall be provided with a 
flushometer valve, flushometer tank, or flush tank designed and 
installed so as to supply water in sufficient quantity and rate of 
flow to flush the contents ofthe fixture to which it is connected, 
to cleanse the fixture, and to refill the fixture trap, without 
excessive water use. Flushing devices shall comply with the 
antisiphon requirements in accordance with Section 603.5. 


413.2 Flushometer Valves. Flushometer valves and 
flushometer tanks shall comply with ASSE 1037/ASME 
A112.1037/CSA B125.37, and shall be installed in accor- 
dance with Section 603.5.1. No manually controlled 
flushometer valve shall be used to flush more than one urinal, 
and each such urinal flushometer valve shall be an approved, 
self-closing type discharging a predetermined quantity of 
water. Flushometers shall be installed so that they will be 
accessible for repair. Flushometer valves shall not be used 
where the water pressure is insufficient to operate them prop- 
erly. Where the valve is operated, it shall complete the cycle 
of operation automatically, opening fully, and closing posi- 
tively under the line water pressure. Each flushometer shall be 
provided with a means for regulating the flow through it. 
[OSPHD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Sensor operated flush valves shall 
be capable of functioning during loss of normal power. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


413.3 Flush Tanks. Flush tanks for manual flushing shall 
be equipped with a flush valve that complies with ASME 
A112.19.5/CSA В45.15 and an antisiphon fill valve (ballcock) 
that complies with ASSE 1002/ASME A112.1002/CSA 
B125.12 and installed in accordance with Section 603.5.2. 


413.4 Water Supply for Flush Tanks. An adequate quan- 
tity of water shall be provided to flush and clean the fixture 
served. The water supply for flushing tanks and flushometer 
tanks equipped for manual flushing shall be controlled by a 
float valve or other automatic device designed to refill the 
tank after each discharge and to shut completely offthe water 
flow to the tank where the tank is filled to operational capac- 
ity. Provision shall be made to automatically supply water to 
the fixture to refill the trap seal after each flushing. 


413.5 Overflows in Flush Tanks. Flush tanks shall be pro- 
vided with overflows discharging into the water closet or uri- 
nal connected thereto. Overflows supplied as original parts with 
the fixture shall be of sufficient size to prevent tank flooding at 
the maximum rate at which the tank 1s supplied with water 
under normal operating conditions and where installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


414.0 Dishwashing Machines. 


414.1 Application. Domestic dishwashing machines shall 
comply with UL 749. Domestic dishwashing machines con- 
taining sanitation features shall comply with NSF/ANSI 184 
and UL 749. 


Commercial dishwashing machines shall comply with 
NSF/ANSI 3 and UL 921. | 


414.2 Backflow Protection. The water supply connection 
to a commercial dishwashing machine shall be protected by 
an air gap or a backflow prevention device in accordance with 
Section 603.3.2, Section 603.3.5, Section 603.3.6, or that 
complies with ASSE 1004. 


414.3 Drainage Connection. Domestic dishwashing 
machines shall discharge indirectly through an air gap fitting 
in accordance with Section 807.3 into a waste receptor, a wye 
branch fitting on the tailpiece of a kitchen sink, or dishwasher 
connection of a food waste disposer. Commercial dishwash- 
ing machines shall discharge indirectly through an air break 
in accordance with Section 807.1, or by a direct connection in | 
accordance with Section 704.3. 


414.4 Lead Content. Dishwashing machines shall comply 
with the lead content requirements of Section 604.2. 


415.0 Drinking Fountains. 


415.1 Application. Drinking fountains shall be self-closing 
and comply with ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, ASME 
А112.19.2/СЅА 845.1, or ASME A112.19.3/CSA В45.4. 
Drinking fountains and bottle filling stations shall also comply 
with NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. Permanently installed electric water 
coolers and bottle filling stations shall also comply with UL 399. 
[HCD 1] Drinking fountains shall be installed and so regu- 
lated that a jet of water extending at least 2 inches (51 mm) 
in height from the water orifice shall be constantly available. 
The orifice shall not be accessible to the mouth of the drinker 
nor subject to immersion. 


65 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


415.2 Drinking Fountain Alternatives. Where food is 
consumed indoors, water stations shall be permitted to be sub- 
stituted for drinking fountains. Bottle filling stations shall be 
permitted to be substituted for drinking fountains up to 50 per- 
cent of the requirements for drinking fountains. Drinking foun- 
tains shall not be required for an occupant load of 30 or less. 


415.3 Drainage Connection. Drinking fountains shall be 
permitted to discharge directly into the drainage system or indi- 
rectly through an air break in accordance with Section 809.1. 


415.4 Location. Drinking fountains shall not be installed in 
toilet rooms. 


416.0 Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment. 


416.1 Application. Emergency eyewash and shower equip- 
ment shall comply with ISEA Z358.1. 


416.2 Water Supply. Emergency eyewash and shower 
equipment shall not be limited in the water supply flow rates. 
Where hot and cold water is supplied to an emergency shower 
or eyewash station, the temperature of the water supply shall 
be controlled by a temperature actuated mixing valve com- 
plying with ASSE 1071. Where water is supplied directly to 
an emergency shower or eyewash station from a water heater, 
the water heater shall comply with ASSE 1085. The flow rate, 
discharge pattern, and temperature of flushing fluids shall be 
provided in accordance with ISEA Z358.1. 


416.3 Installation. Emergency eyewash and shower equip- 
ment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. 


416.4 Location. Emergency eyewash and shower equip- 
ment shall be located on the same level as the hazard and 
accessible for immediate use. The path of travel shall be free 
of obstructions and shall be clearly identified with signage. 


416.5 Drain. A drain shall not be required for emergency 
eyewash or shower equipment. Where a drain is provided, the 
discharge shall be in accordance with Section 811.0. 


417.0 Faucets and Fixture Fittings. 


417.1 Application. Faucets and fixture fittings shall comply 
with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. Fixture fittings covered 
under the scope of NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 shall comply with the 
requirements of NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. 


4171.1 Wash Fountains. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] Wash 
fountains shall have a maximum flow rate of not more 
than 1.8 gallons (6.81 L) per minute/20 [rim space 
(inches) at 60 psi] in compliance with Chapter 5, Divi- 
sion 5.3 of the California Green Building Standards 
Code (CALGreen). 
4171.2 Metering Faucets for Wash Fountains. 
[BSC-CG & DSA-SS] Metering faucets for wash foun- 
tains shall have a maximum flow rate of not more than 
0.20 gallons (0.76 L) per cycle/20 [rim space (inches) at 
60 psi] in compliance with Chapter 5, Division 5.3 of the 
California Green Building Standards Code (CALGreen). 
417.2 Deck Mounted Bath/Shower Valves. Deck 
mounted bath/shower transfer valves with integral backflow 
protection shall comply with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 


66 


This shall include handheld showers, and other bathing appli- 
ances mounted on the deck of bathtubs or other bathing appli- 
ances that incorporate a hose or pull out feature. 


417.3 Handheld Showers. Handheld showers shall comply 
with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. Handheld showers with 
integral backflow protection shall comply with ASME 
A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 or shall have a backflow prevention 
device that complies with ASME A112.18.3 or ASSE 1014. 


417.4 Faucets and Fixture Fittings with Hose Con- 
nected Outlets. Faucets and fixture fittings with pull out 
spout shall comply with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 
Faucets and fixture fittings with pull out spouts with integral 
backflow protection shall comply with ASME 
A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 or shall have a backflow preventer 
device that complies with ASME A112.18.3. 


417.5 Separate Controls for Hot and Cold Water. 
Where two separate handles control the hot and cold water, 
the left-hand control of the faucet where facing the fixture fit- 
ting outlet shall control the hot water. Faucets and diverters 
shall be connected to the water distribution system so that hot 
water corresponds to the left side of the fixture fitting. 


Single-handle mixing valves installed in showers and 
tub-shower combinations shall have the flow of hot water cor- 
responding to the markings on the fixture fitting. 


417.6 Low-Pressure Water Dispenser. Beverage faucets 
shall comply with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. Electri- 
cally heated or cooled water dispensers shall comply with 
ASSE 1023. 


417.7 Head Shampoo Sink Faucets. Head shampoo sink 
faucets shall be supplied with hot water that is limited to not 
more than 120°F (49°C). Each faucet shall have integral 
check valves to prevent crossover flow between the hot and 
cold water supply connections. The means for regulating the 
maximum temperature shall be in accordance with one of the 
following: 


(1) A limiting device conforming to ASSE 1070/ASME 
A112.1070/CSA B125.70. 


(2) A water heater conforming to ASSE 1084. 


(3) A temperature-actuated, flow-reduction device con- 
forming to ASSE 1062. 


417.8 Footbaths and Pedicure Baths. The water sup- 
plied to specialty plumbing fixtures, such as pedicure chairs 
having an integral foot bathtub and footbaths, shall be lim- 
ited to not more than 120°F (49°C) by a water-temperature- 
limiting device that conforms to ASSE 1070/ASME 
A112.1070/CSA B125.70 or by a water heater complying 
with ASSE 1084. 


418.0 Floor Drains. 


418.1 Application. Floor drains shall comply with ASME 
A112.3.1, ASME A112.6.3, or CSA B79. 


418.2 Strainer. Floor drains shall be considered plumbing 
fixtures and each such drain shall be provided with an 
approved-type strainer having a waterway equivalent to the 
area of the tailpiece. Floor drains shall be of an approved type 
and shall provide a watertight joint on the floor. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


418.3 Location of Floor Drains. Floor drains shall be 
installed in the following areas: 


(1) Toilet rooms containing two or more water closets or a 
combination of one water closet and one urinal, except in 
a dwelling unit. 


(2) Commercial kitchens and in accordance with Section 
704.3. 


(3) Laundry rooms in commercial buildings and common 
laundry facilities in multi-family dwelling buildings. 


(4) Boiler rooms. 


418.4 Food Storage Areas. Where drains are provided in 
storerooms, walk-in freezers, walk-in coolers, refrigerated 
equipment, or other locations where food is stored, such 
drains shall have indirect waste piping. Separate waste pipes 
shall be run from each food storage area, each with an indi- 
rect connection to the building sanitary drainage system. 
Traps shall be provided in accordance with Section 801.3.2 of 
this code and shall be vented. 


Indirect drains shall be permitted to be located in freez- 
ers or other spaces where freezing temperatures are main- 
tained, provided that traps, where supplied, shall be located 
where the seal will not freeze. Otherwise, the floor of the 
freezer shall be sloped to a floor drain located outside of the 
storage compartment. 


418.5 Floor Slope. Floors shall be sloped to floor drains. 


419.0 Food Waste Disposers. 


419.1 Application. Food waste disposal units shall comply 
with UL 430. Residential food waste disposers shall also 
comply with ASSE 1008. 


419.2 Drainage Connection. Approved wye or other 
directional-type branch fittings shall be installed in continu- 
ous wastes connecting or receiving the discharge from a food 
waste disposer. No dishwasher drain shall be connected to a 
sink tailpiece, continuous waste, or trap on the discharge side 
of a food waste disposer. 

419.3 Water Supply. A cold water supply shall be provided 
for food waste disposers. Such connection to the water sup- 
ply shall be protected by an air gap or backflow prevention 
device in accordance with Section 603.2. 


420.0 Sinks. 
420.1 Application. Sinks shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.1/CSA В45.2, ASME A112.19.2/CSA В45.1, 
ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, CSA B45.5/IAPMO Z124, 
CSA B45.8/IAPMO 7403, or CSA B45.12/IAPMO 7402. 
Moveable sink systems shall comply with ASME 
A112.19.12. Sink assemblies with automatic soap dispensers, 
faucets, or hand dryers shall comply with IAPMO IGC 127. 
420.2 Water Consumption. Sink faucets shall have a max- 
imum flow rate of not more than 2.2 gpm at 60 psi (8.3 L/m 
at 414 kPa). 
Exceptions: 
(1) Clinical sinks 

| (2) Laundry sinks 
(3) Service sinks 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


420.2.1 Kitchen Faucets. [BSC-CG & DSA-SS] || 
Kitchen faucets shall have a maximum flow rate of not 
more than 1.8 gallons (6.81 L) per minute at 60 psi (414 || 
kPa). Kitchen faucets may temporarily increase the flow 
above the maximum rate, but not to exceed 2.2 gallons 
(8.3 L) per minute at 60 psi (414 kPa), and must default || 
to a maximum flow rate of 1.8 gallons (6.81 L) per 
minute at 60 psi (414 kPa) in compliance with Chapter || 
5, Division 5.3 of the California Green Building Stan- 
dards Code (CALGreen). 


420.2.2 Kitchen Faucets. [HCD 1] The maximum flow 
rate of kitchen faucets shall not exceed 1.8 gallons (6.81 
Г) per minute at 60 psi (414 kPa). Kitchen faucets may || 
temporarily increase the flow above the maximum rate, 
but not to exceed 2.2 gallons (8.32 L) per minute at 60 psi 
(414 kPa), and must default to a maximum flow rate of 1.8 | 
gallons (6.81 L) per minute at 60 psi (414 kPa) in com- 
pliance with Chapter 4, Division 4.3 or Chapter 5, Divi- 
sion 5.3 of the California Green Building Standards Code 
(CALGreen), as applicable. 


Note: Where faucets meeting the maximum flow rate of 
1.8 gpm (6.81 L) are unavailable, aerators or other 
means may be used to achieve reduction. 
420.3 Pre-Rinse Spray Valve. Commercial food service 
pre-rinse spray valves shall have a maximum flow rate in 
accordance with Table 420.3 and shall be equipped with an 
integral automatic shutoff. 


TABLE 420.3 
COMMERCIAL PRE-RINSE SPRAY VALVE MAXIMUM FLOW RATE 
PRODUCT CLASS BY SPRAY FORCE | MAXIMUM FLOW RATE, 
Product Class 1 (< 5.0 ounces-force) 1.00 
Product Class 2 (> 5.0 ounces-force and 
1.20 
< 8.0 ounces-force) 
Product Class 3 (> 8.0 ounces-force) 1.28 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/min, 1 ounce-force = 0.278 N 


< 


420.4 Waste Outlet. Kitchen and laundry sinks shall have 
a waste outlet and fixture tailpiece not less than 114 inches 
(40 mm) in diameter. Service sinks shall have a waste outlet 
and fixture tailpiece not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diam- 
eter. Fixture tailpieces shall be constructed from the materi- 
als specified in Section 701.2 for drainage piping. Waste 
outlets shall be provided with an approved strainer. 


421.0 Floor Sinks. 


421.1 Application. Floor sinks shall comply with ASME 
A112.6.7. 


421.2 Strainers. The waste outlet of a floor sink shall be 
provided with an approved strainer or grate that is removable 
and accessible. 


422.0 Minimum Number of Required Fixtures. 


422.1 Fixture Count. Plumbing fixtures shall be provided 
for the type of building occupancy and in the minimum num- 
ber shown in Table 422.1. The total occupant load and occu- 


67 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


pancy classification shall be determined in accordance with 
the California Building Code. Occupancy classification not 
shown in Table 422.1 shall be considered separately by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

[OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] Plumbing fixtures shall be provided 
in the minimum number shown in Table 4-2. 


|| Exception: [BSC & DSA-SS] Using occupancy classifica- 
tion, described as function of space, determine occupant load 
factor from Table 4-1 Occupant Load Factor, of this chapter. 


| 422.1.1 Fixture Calculations. The minimum number of 
fixtures shall be calculated at 50 percent male and 50 per- 
cent female based on the total occupant load. Where infor- 
mation submitted indicates a difference in the distribution 
of the sexes such information shall be used to determine 
the number of fixtures for each sex. Once the occupancy 
load and occupancy are determined, Table 422.1 shall be 
applied to determine the minimum number of plumbing 
fixtures required. Where applying the fixture ratios in Table 
422.1 results in fractional numbers, such numbers shall be 
rounded to the next whole number. For multiple occupan- 
cies, fractional numbers shall be first summed and then 


II rounded to the next whole number. For toilet facilities 


designed for use by all genders, the minimum number of 
fixtures shall be the aggregate calculated at 50 percent 
female and 50 percent male in accordance with Table 
422.1. Where all-gender fixtures are provided in addition to 
separate men's and women's facilities, those fixtures shall 
be included in determining the number of fixtures provided 
in an occupancy. [BSC & DSA-SS] The substitution of a 
water closet for each urinal shall be permitted provided the 
total number of fixtures installed complies with Table 422.1. 


» 422.1.2 Single Use, Family or Assisted-Use Toilet, 


and Bathing Facilities. Where single use, family or 
assisted-use toilet, and bathing rooms are required, in 
applicable building regulations, the facilities shall be 
installed in accordance with those regulations. Fixtures 
located in single use, family or assisted-use, and bathing 
room facilities shall contribute to the total number of 
required fixtures in accordance with Section 422.1. 


422.1.3 [DSA-AC] Effective January 1, 1990, in new 
construction and those existing facilities which occu- 
pancy type are listed in Tables 422.1 and 4-4 for public 
use, which apply for permit to undertake construction, 
structural alterations, repairs or improvement which 
exceed 50 percent of the square footage of the entire 
facility, shall install water closets, urinals, lavatories and 
drinking fountains as stipulated in Tables 422.1 and 4-4 
for public use. Community and/or municipal parks with 
a bleacher capacity not exceeding 500 seats shall be 
exempt from the requirements of this section and Tables 
422.1 and 4-4. Each bathroom shall comply with Part 2, 
Chapter ПА and 11B of the California Building Code. 


422.1.4 [OSHPD 1, 2, 3,4 & 5] OSHPD facilities shall 
also comply with requirements of the California Building 
Code, Sections 1224, 1225, 1226, 1227 and 1228. 


422.2 Separate Facilities. Separate toilet facilities shall 
be provided for each sex. 


68 


Exceptions [Not adopted for OSHPD 1,2, 3, 4 & 5]: 
(1) Residential installations. 

(2) In occupancies with a total occupant load of 10 or less, 
including customers and employees, one toilet facility, 
designed for use by no more than one person at a time, 
shall be permitted for use by both sexes. 

In business and mercantile occupancies with a total occu- 
pant load of 50 or less including customers and employees, 
one toilet facility, designed for use by no more than one 
person at a time, shall be permitted for use by both sexes. [| 
Separate facilities shall not be required where rooms have 
fixtures designed for use by both sexes and the water clos- 
ets are installed in privacy compartments. Urinals shall be 
located in a privacy compartment [BSC & DSA-SS], as 
defined, or separate private area and be visually separated 
from the remainder of the room. Water closet and urinal 
compartments shall comply with sections 422.6 and 422.7 
respectively. 

422.2.1 Single Use Facilities. Single use toilet facil- 
ities, bathing facilities, and family or assisted use toilet 
facilities shall be identified with signage indicating use 
by either sex. 

422.2.2 Family or Assisted-Use Toilet Facilities. 
Where a separate toilet facility 1s required for each sex, 
and each toilet facility is required to have only one water 
closet, two family or assisted-use toilet facilities shall be 
permitted in place of the required separate toilet facilities. 
422.3 Fixture Requirements for Special Occupancies. 
Additional fixtures shall be permitted to be required where 
unusual environmental conditions or referenced activities are 
encountered. In food preparation areas, fixture requirements 
shall be permitted to be dictated by health codes. 

422.3.1 [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6] Separate toilet facil- || 

ities shall be provided for the use of patients, staff per- 

sonnel and visitors. 

Exceptions: 

(1) For Primary Care Clinics where a facility contains 
no more than three examination and/or treatment 
rooms, the patient toilet shall be permitted to serve 
waiting areas. 


(3) 


(4 


МУ 


(2) For public waiting areas with an occupant load of 
10 or less, one toilet facility, designed for use by no 
more than one person at a time, shall be permitted 
for use by both sexes. 
422.4 Toilet Facilities Serving Employees and Cus- 
tomers. [Not adopted for OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Each 
building or structure shall be provided with toilet facilities for 
employees and customers. Requirements for customers and 
employees shall be permitted to be met with a single set of 
restrooms accessible to both groups. 

Required toilet facilities for employees and customers 
located in shopping malls or centers shall be permitted to be 
met by providing a centrally located toilet facility accessible to 
several stores. The maximum travel distance from entry to any 
store to the toilet facility shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm). 

Required toilet facilities for employees and customers in 
other than shopping malls or centers shall have a maximum 
travel distance not to exceed 500 feet (152 m). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


422.4.1 Access to Toilet Facilities. In multi-story 
buildings, accessibility to the required toilet facilities shall 
not exceed one vertical story. Access to the required toilet 
facilities for customers shall not pass through areas desig- 
nated as for employee use only such as kitchens, food 
preparation areas, storage rooms, closets, or similar spaces. 
Toilet facilities accessible only to private offices shall not 
be counted to determine compliance with this section. 


422.5 Toilet Facilities for Workers. Toilet facilities shall 
be provided and maintained in a sanitary condition for the use 
of workers during construction. 


422.6 Water Closet Compartment. Public water closets 
shall occupy a separate compartment with walls or partitions 
anda door enclosing the fixtures to ensure privacy. Partitions 
for water closets located in separate gender toilet or bath- 
rooms shall comply with the Type B security requirements of 
IAPMO Z124.10. Partitions for water closets located in all 
gender toilet or bathrooms shall comply with the Type A 
security requirements of IAPMO Z124.10. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Water closet compartments shall not be required in a sin- 
gle-occupant toilet room having a lockable door. 


(2) Toilet rooms in day care facilities having more than one 
water closets shall be permitted to have one water closet 
without an enclosing compartment. 


(3) [BSC & DSA-SS]. Type A Security Requirements of 
IAPMO Z124.10 in all gender toilet or bathrooms shall 
not be allowed. Compartments for water closets located 
in all-gender multi-user bathrooms shall be privacy com- 
partments, as defined. Each compartment door shall be 
lockable from the inside of the compartment, with a door 
locking device that is readily distinguishable as locked 
from the outside of the compartment. Privacy compart- 
ments and doors which are not full height or floor to ceil- 
ing may be permitted by the enforcing agency. 

422.7 Urinal Partitions. Each urinal shall be separated with 

walls or partitions to provide privacy. The horizontal dimen- 

sion between walls or partitions at each urinal shall comply 
with Section 402.5. Partitions for urinals shall comply with 
the Type C security requirements of IAPMO Z124.10. Walls 

or partitions shall extend from not less than 12 inches (305 

mm) above the finished floor to not less than 60 inches (1524 

mm) above the finished floor. Walls shall extend outward 

from the wall surface not less than 18 inches (457 mm). Uri- 

nals located in all gender toilet rooms shall be visually sepa- 
rated from the remainder of the room or each urinal shall be 

installed in a privacy compartment complying with Type A 

security requirements of IAPMO Z124.10. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Urinal partitions shall not be required in a single occu- 
pant or family/assisted-use toilet room with a lockable 
door. 


(2 [BSC & DSA-SS]. Type A Security Requirements of 
IAPMO Z124.10 in all gender toilet rooms shall not be 
allowed. Urinals in all gender toilet rooms not located in 
a separate private area shall be privacy compartments, 
as defined. Each compartment door shall be lockable 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


device that is readily distinguishable as locked from the 
outside of the compartment. Privacy compartments and 
doors which are not full height or floor to ceiling may be 
permitted by the enforcing agency. 


422.8 Cosmetology. [CA] Each school shall provide pub- || 
lic toilet rooms for each sex on the licensed premises in accor- 
dance with the California Plumbing Code, Table 422.1. 


422.9 Cosmetology Establishments. [CA] Each estab- || 
lishment where hairdressing services are performed shall pro- 
vide at least one public toilet room located on the premises in 
accordance with the California Plumbing Code, Table 422.1. 


422.10 Commissaries Serving Mobile Food Prepara- || 
tion Units. [DPH] Commissaries serving mobile food 
preparation units shall have at least one hose bib. The hose 
bib shall be supplied with hot and cold water and be provided 
with a single spout, a backflow-preventer device and shall be 
located on the premises of the establishment. 

422.11 Employee Lavatories in Food Establishments. || 
[DPH] Employee lavatories installed in food establishments 
shall be equipped with an approved single spout capable of 
providing tempered (100°F - 115°F) (37.8°C - 46.1°C) run- 


ning water. 


from the inside of the compartment, with a door locking | 


Note: This requirement applies only to commissaries serving 
mobile food preparation units. 


69 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


load. 


TAB 


LE 422.1 


MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES! 


Each building shall be provided with sanitary facilities, including provisions for persons with disabilities as prescribed by the Department Having Jurisdic- 
[| tion’. Table 422.1 applies to new buildings, additions to a building, and changes of occupancy or type in an existing building resulting in increased occupant 


For requirements for persons with disabilities, Chapter 11A or 11B of the California Building Code shall be used. 


II [BSC & DSA-SS] The total occupant load shall be determined in accordance with the California Building Code or Table 4-1 Occupant Load Factor. 


Exceptions: 


(1) [HCD 1-AC & HCD 2] For applications listed in Sections 1.8.2.1.2 and 1.8.2.1.3 regulated by the Department of Housing and Community Development, 
each building shall be provided with sanitary facilities, including provisions for persons with disabilities as prescribed by the Department. Covered mul- 
tifamily dwellings required to be accessible to persons with disabilities shall comply with Chapter 11A of the California Building Code. Permanent build- 


ings in mobilehome parks and special occupancy parks required to be accessible by persons with disabilities, shall comply with Chapter 11B of the 
California Building Code. 


(2) 


health official shall be provided to the dwelling sites. It shall not be required that such facilities be located within the dwelling. 


[HCD 1] For limited density owner-built rural dwelling sanitary facilities, the type, design and number of facilities as required and approved by the local 


BATHTUBS DRINKING 
URINALS OR FOUNTAINS/ 
TYPE OF WATER CLOSETS (FIXTURES LAVATORIES SHOWERS FACILITIES 6,7 
OCCUPANCY? (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? PER (FIXTURES PER PERSON) | (FIXTURES | (FIXTURES | OTHER 
PERSON)* PER PER 
PERSON) PERSON) 
A-1 Assembly occupancy Female 
: Female 
(fixed or permanent seat- Mal 1: 1-25 Male Male 1: 1-100 
ing)- theaters, concert i1 100% | 22650 | 1:1-200 | 1:1-200 1:5 101598 1: 1-250 
halls, and auditoriums 2.101.200 | 3:51-100 | 2:201-300 | 2: 201-400 | 3. 201-300 2: 251-500 
3. 201-400 4: 101-200 | 3: 301-400 | 3: 401-600 5. 301-500 3: 501-750 . 
| 6: 201-300 | 4:401-600 | 4: 601-750 6. 501-750 1 5CI”V1C6 
8: 301-400 Е E sink or 
І laundry sink 
Over 400, add 1 fixture for Е Over 750, add 1 fixture for წერაა 
each additional 500 males ure | each additional 250 males Ше 
j for each for each 
and 1 fixture for each Е and 1 fixture for each 2 
ი additional e additional 
additional 125 females. additional 200 females. 
300 males. 500 persons. 
A-2 Assembly occu- Female 
pancy- restaurants, pubs, Male 1: 1-25 Male | | 
lounges, nightclubs and 1:1-50 | 2:26-50 | 1:1-200 წადი \ | {е 1: 1-250 
banquet halls 2:51-150 | 3:51-100 | 2:201-300 |17 ang. | 2: 151-200 2: 251-500 
3: 151-300 | 4: 101-200 | 3:301-400 3: 201-400 4. 201-400 3: 501-750 | 
4: 301-400 | 6: 201-300 | 4:401-600 | `` : 1 service 
8: 301-400 c sink or 
laundry sink 
Over 400, add 1 fixture for ს. Over 400, add 1 fixture for +... 
each additional 250 males Ше each additional 250 males iod 
Е for each for each 
and 1 fixture for each 125 2 and 1 fixture for each fe 
femal additional | კკ ცხი! 200 femal additional 
eae 300 males. ადე 500 persons. 
A-3 Assembly occupancy Female 
; : Female 
(typical without fixed or M 1: 1-25 Male Male > შეგ 
permanent seating)- 1: jing 2: 26-50 1: 1-100 1: 1-200 " $566 1: 1-250 
arcades, places of wor- 2.101.200 | 3151-100 | 2: 101-200 | 2: 201-400 | 4 201-300 2: 251-500 
ship, museums, libraries, 3. 201.400 4: 101-200 | 3: 201-400 | 3: 401-600 5. 301-500 3: 501-750 | 
lecture halls, gymnasiums | "^^ ~ 6: 201-300 | 4: 401-600 | 4: 601-750 |, | service 
(without spectator seat- 8: 301-400 6: 501-750 — sink or 
ing), indoor pools (with- Over 600 Over 750 laundry sink 
out spectator seating) Over 400, add 1 fixture for ეს Over 750, add 1 fixture for ME 
oe add 1 fixture 2 add 1 fixture 
each additional 500 males each additional 250 males 
А for each for each 
and 1 fixture for each M and 1 fixture for each მი 
ი additional СУ additional 
additional 125 females. additional 200 females. 
300 males. 500 persons. 


70 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 422.1 
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES! (continued) 
BATHTUBS DRINKING 
URINALS OR FOUNTAINS/ 
TYPE OF WATER CLOSETS (FIXTURES LAVATORIES SHOWERS FACILITIES 6,7 
OCCUPANCY? (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? PER (FIXTURES PER PERSON) | (FIXTURES | (FIXTURES | OTHER 
PERSON) PER PER 
PERSON) PERSON) 
A-4 Assembly occupancy Female 
(indoor activities or sport- 1: 1-25 Male Ferale 
ing events with spectator ur 2: 26-50 1: 1-100 ი. я 1: 1-250 
seating)- swimming pa 3:51-100 | 2: 101-200 ENS m 2: 251-500 
: А 2: 101-200 2: 201-400 | 4: 201-300 
pools, skating rinks, are- | "401-400 | 4: 101-200 | 3: 201-400 3 401 7§0 | 5: 301-500 250750 оъ 
nas, and gymnasiums еня - 501. 4:401-600 | ^ 7 7 E 56LV10> 
i 652015300 6: 501-750 => sink or 
8: 301-400 : 
(TET TRT laundry sink 
Over 400, add 1 fixture for ad ი... Over 750, add 1 fixture for ad E 
each additional 500 males for each е each additional 250 males for each L 
and 1 fixture for each addi- ა 8. ‘ and 1 fixture for each i + b 
2 additional n additional 
tional 125 females. additional 200 females. 
300 males. 500 persons. 
A-5 Assembly occupancy Female Female 
(outdoor activities or 1: 1-25 Male 
; Male Male 1: 1-100 
sporting events)- amuse- 1: 1-100 2: 26-50 1: 1-100 1: 1-200 2: 101-200 1: 1-250 
ment parks, grandstands : 3:51-100 | 2: 101-200 : К 2: 251-500 
. 2: 101-200 2: 201-400 | 4: 201-300 
and stadiums 4: 101-200 | 3: 201-400 3: 501-750 ; 
3: 201-400 3: 401-750 | 5: 301-500 1 service 
6: 201-300 | 4: 401-600 . 
6: 501-750 = sink or 
8: 301-400 unda snk 
aundry sin 
Over 400, add 1 fixture for 1... Over 750, add 1 fixture for е 
each additional 500 males * f ín 15 each additional 250 males დ f n > 
and 1 fixture for each addi- S 59% and 1 fixture for each jos Sag 
; additional M additional 
tional 125 females. additional 200 females. 
300 males. 500 persons. 
mun pattie wee Female Mal Female 
кг eee ATE Male 1: 1-15 Male TS 1: 1-50 
service type transactions)- 1: 1-50 2: 16-30 1: 1-100 1: 1-75 2: 51-100 
რდი а КИ па 2:51-100 | 3:31-50 | 2: 101-200 x RM 3: 101-150 
hen tty salons ambulatory | 3: 101-200 | 4:51-100 | 3: 201-400 | 7° от 399 | 4: 151-200 edes 
eauty 501005, ambulatory | 4. 201.400 | 8: 101-200 | 4: 401-600 5 5: 201-300 20110 
health care facilities, laun- 5: 301-400 == 1 per 150 sink or 
: : 11: 201-400 6: 301-400 3 
dries and dry cleaning, laundry sink 
educational institutions Over 400, add 1 fixture | Over 600, . 
(above high school), or for each additional 500 ааа 1 fixture 2 er irum кнм i 
training facilities not males and 1 fixture for for each and 1 fixture for each 
located within school, post each additional 150 additional dditional 200 femal 
offices and printing shops females. 300 males. SECOS Sma es: 
E Educational 00000 ee Male Female Male Male Female l SVISS 
private or public schools 1 per 50 1 per 30 1 per 100 1 ner 40 1 рег 40 — ] per 150 sink or 
P P P P P laundry sink 
F1, F2 Factory or Indus- ] shower for 
trial occupancy-fabricat- each 15 
ing or assembly work Male Female Male Female persons 1: 1-250 
1: 1-50 1: 1-50 E 1: 1-50 1: 1-50 exposed to | 2: 251.500 
2: 51-75 2:51-75 2: 51-75 2: 51-75 excessive | 4. 501.750 
3: 76-100 3: 76-100 3: 76-100 3: 76-100 heat or to : 1 service 
skin con- sink or 
tamination laundry sink 
with poison- | Over 750, 
Over 100, add 1 fixture Over 100, add 1 fixture for| ous, infec- |add 1 fixture 
for each additional 40 per- — each additional 40 per- tious or for each 
sons. sons. irritating additional 
material |500) persons. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


71 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 422.1 
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES! (continued) 
BATHTUBS DRINKING 
URINALS OR FOUNTAINS/ 
І ТҮРЕ ОЕ WATER CLOSETS (FIXTURES LAVATORIES SHOWERS FACILITIES OTHERS? 
OCCUPANCY? (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? PER (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? | (FIXTURES | (FIXTURES 
PERSON)* PER PER 
PERSON) PERSON) 
I-1 Institutional occu- 
pancy (houses more than 
16 persons on a 24-hour 1 service 
3 Male Female Male Female : 
basis)- substance abuse 1 15 1 15 — pees 1 рег15 1 per 8 1 per 150 sink or 
| centers, assisted living, рег ре ре ре laundry sink 
group homes, or residen- 
tial facilities 
1-2 Institu- Hospitals 
tional occu- | and nursing 1 per room — 1 per room 1 per room 7 
pancy-medi | homes-indi- 1 service 
| : 1 per 150 sink or 
cal, psychi- vidual 1 ink 
І atric, surgi- | rooms and 1 per 8 patients =m 1 per 10 patients 1 per 20 aundry sin 
cal or ward room patients 
пиша Hospital 
homes Waiting or 1 
Visitor per room — 1 per room == 1 рег room m 
Rooms 
Male Female 
1: 1-15 1: 1-15 
Employee 2: 16-35 3: 16-35 Male Female 
Use 3: 36-55 4: 36-55 Е 1 per 40 1 per 40 Е Е 
Over 55, add 1 fixture for 
each additional 40 persons. 
ee Prisons 1 per cell — 1 per cell 1 per 20 n id = 
dr. Correctional ПРЕТИ 
d m 5 eae 1 per 8 — 1 per 10 1 per 8 1 per floor sink or 
І people) center laundry sink 
Male Female 
1: 1-15 1: 1-15 
Employee | 2:16-35 3: 16-35 o Male Female m 1 150 E 
Use 3:36-55 | 4:36-55 1рег40 | 1 per 40 pe 
Over 55, add 1 fixture for 
each additional 40 persons. 
I-4 Institutional occu- Male Female 
pancy (any age that 1: 1-15 1: 1-15 
receives care forlessthan | 2:16-35 3: 16-35 1 service 
24 hours) 3:36-55 | 4:36-55 Ls i Sei გ о = 1 рег 150 | sink or 
I Over 55, add 1 fixture for 5 pe laundry sink 
each additional 40 per- 
sons. 
M Mercantile occupancy Male Female Female 
(the sale of merchandise 1: 1-100 1: 1-100 Male Male 1: 1-200 1: 1-250 1 service 
and accessible to the pub- 2. 101-200 2: 101-200 | 0: 1-200 1: 1-200 2: 201-300 — 2: 251-500 sink or 
| lic) ` 4: 201-300 | 1:201-400 | 2: 201-400 | 3: 501-750 | laundry sink 
3: 201-400 3: 301-400 
6: 301-400 
Over 400, add 1 fixture for eee Over 400, add 1 fixture for ae 
each additional 500 males ი h each additional 500 males > fi h o 
and 1 fixture for each 200 TS and 1 fixture for each 400 oe 
ава additional females; additional 
500 males. 500 persons. 


72 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 422.1 
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES! (continued) 
BATHTUBS | DRINKING 
URINALS OR FOUNTAINS/ 
TYPE OF WATER CLOSETS (FIXTURES LAVATORIES SHOWERS | FACILITIES 6.7 
OCCUPANCY? (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? PER (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? | (FIXTURES | (FIXTURES | OTHER? 
PERSON)* PER PER 
PERSON) | PERSON) 
R-1 Residential occu- Р Я 
ae 1 service sink 
расу (rintmal'stày): 1 per sleeping room — 1 per sleeping room l per sleep- — or 
hotels, motels, bed and ing room : 
breakfast homes laundry sink 
ы" Male Female Male Male Female 
occupancy 1 per 10 1 per 8 1 per 25 1 per 12 1 per 12 
(long-term მ. Д | Оует 150 
ог реппа- Dormitories | Add 1 fixture for each add 1 fixture Add 1 fixture for each 1 per 8 ] per 150 
nent) additional 25 males and 1 tor ead additional 20 males and 1 
fixture for each additional 3s fixture for each additional 1 service 
20 females. А 15 females. : 
50 males. sink or 
laundry sink 
Male Female 
1: 1-15 1: 1-15 
Employee 2: 16-35 3: 16-35 Male Female 
Use 3: 36-55 4: 36-55 1 1 per 40 1 per 40 Е БЕ 
Over 55, add 1 fixture for 
each additional 40 persons 
] kitchen sink 
per apartment. 
1 laundry sink 
or 1 automatic 
clothes washer 
Apartment ] per connection 
i Iper apartment 1 l per apartment Tm ш per unit or 1 
laundry sink or 
] automatic 
clothes washer 
connection for 
each 12 units 
R-3 Residential occu- Male Female Male Female 
pancy (long-term or per- 1 per 10 1 per 8 1 per 12 1 per 12 
manent in nature) for 1 service 
more than 5 but does not Add | fixture for each == Add 1 fixture for each 1 per 8 1 per 150 sink or 
exceed 16 occupants) additional 25 males and 1 additional 20 males and 1 laundry sink 
fixture for each additional fixture for each additional 
20 females. 15 females. 
R-3 Residential occu- 1 kitchen 
pancy (one and two fam- sink and 
ily dwellings) 1 per one 1 automatic 
1 per one and two family 1 per one and two family | and two clothes washer 
dwelling > dwelling family T connection per 
dwelling one and two 
family 
dwelling 
R-4 Residential occu- Male Female Male Female 
pancy (residential care or 1 per 10 1 per 8 1 per 12 1 per 12 | 
assisted living) 1 service 
Add 1 fixture for each ართ Add 1 fixture for each І per 8 1 per 150 sink or 
additional 25 males and 1 additional 20 males and 1 laundry sink 
fixture for each additional fixture for each additional 
20 females. 15 females. 
2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 73 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 422.1 
MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES! (continued) 
BATHTUBS | DRINKING 
URINALS OR FOUNTAINS/ 
TYPE OF WATER CLOSETS (FIXTURES LAVATORIES SHOWERS | FACILITIES 6,7 
OCCUPANCY? (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? PER (FIXTURES PER PERSON)? | (FIXTURES | (FIXTURES | OTHER 
PERSON) PER PER 
PERSON) | PERSON) 
S-1, S-2 Storage occu- Male Female Male Female 1: 1-250 
pancy-storage of goods, 1: 1-100 1: 1-100 1: 1-200 1: 1-200 2: 251 500 
warehouse, aircraft 2:101-200 | 2: 101-200 2: 201-400 | 2: 201-400 3: 501-750 
hanger, food products, 3: 201-400 | 3: 201-400 3: 401-750 | 3: 401-750 : . 
> 1 service 
appliances = ез Over 750, sink or 
I Over 400, add ] fixture for Over 750, add 1 fixture for add 1 fix- laundry sink 
each additional 500 males ach additional 500 per. ture for 
and 1 fixture for each SaS in pe each addi- 
additional 150 females. 291: tional 500 
persons. 
Notes: 


! The figures shown are based 
? A restaurant is defined as a b 


a. The number of occupants for a drive-in restaurant shall be considered as equal to the number of parking stalls. 
b. Hand-washing facilities shall be available in the kitchen for employees. 


სა 


upon one fixture being the minimum required for the number of persons indicated or any fraction thereof. 
usiness that sells food to be consumed on the premises. 


The total number of required water closets for females shall be not less than the total number of required water closets and urinals for males. [BSC] This 


requirement shall not apply when single occupancy toilet facilities are provided for each sex in an A or E occupancy with an occupant load of less than 50. 


Either 


a. The required urinal shall be permitted to be omitted or 
b. If installed, the urinal shall not require a second water closet to be provided for the female. 
4 For each urinal added in excess of the minimum required, one water closet shall be permitted to be deducted. The number of water closets shall not be reduced 


to less than two-thirds of the 


minimum requirement. 


Metering or self-closing faucets shall be installed on lavatories intended to serve the transient public. 

Service sinks shall not be required for non-residential occupancies with an occupant load of 15 or less. 
For business and mercantile occupancies, one common service sink shall be permitted when accessible to all businesses and mercantile within 300 feet (91 440 
mm) and within the same story. 


approve alternative design criteria when determining the minimum number of plumbing fixtures. 


74 


[BSC, DSA-AC, DSA-SS, HCD 1 & HCD 2, OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] In accordance with Sections 1.8.7 and 301.3, the Authority Having Jurisdiction may 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 4-1 
OCCUPANT LOAD FACTOR: 
[BSC & DSA-SS] 
OCCUPANT 
FUNCTION OF SPACE* ** LOAD FACTOR 


(square feet) 


Assembly - without fixed seats 


Auditorium, convention and dance hall, lodge, stage, indoor sport/spectator event, worship, arcade, gaming 11 
(standing space) 
Waiting, terminal (portable seating space) 15 
Conference, dining/drinking, lounge (portable seating/table space) 30 
Gallery, museum, exhibit (standing space) 30 
Assembly — with fixed seats See CBC 1004.6 
Use 50% of the fixed 
seating value 
Business (office, sales/soliciting, administration, food processing, courtroom, ambulatory clinic) 150 
See CBC 1004.8 
Dormitory 50 
Day care 35 
Education (classroom) 30 
Through 12th grade 
Education (classroom) 5 
Beyond 12" grade 
Exercise (fitness) 50 
Industrial (fabrication, foundry, workshop, component assembly, repair) 500 
Kitchen/food prep (commercial) 50 
Laboratory 50 
Educational 
Laboratory 
Non-educational 100 
Library 50 
Mercantile (wholesale, retail) 100 
Mall building (covered/open) See CBC 402.8.2 
Residential (long term: central toilet facilities) 200 
Warehouse | 4000 
Storage portions 
Warehouse 500 


Distribution portions (selecting, processing, packing, receiving, shipping) 


* Any uses not specifically listed shall be based on similar uses listed in this table. 


** For a building or space with mixed occupancies, use appropriate occupancy group for each area (for example, a school may have an “A” occupancy for 
the gymnasium, a "B" occupancy for the office, an "E" occupancy for the classrooms, etc.). Accessory areas such as, but not limited to, hallways/corri- 
dors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms, closets and fixed equipment, may be excluded. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 75 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 4-2 
[OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5]?4 MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES 
sace Ec ааа 
Administration Lobby 
Public Toilet - Male 1? 1 
Public Toilet - Female 1? 1 
Airborne infection isolation room 1? 
Airborne infection isolation treatment/exam room 420 
Airborne infection isolation anteroom 1 
Airborne infection isolation toilet room 1? D D 
Cardiac Catheterization procedure room 133 
Central Sterile Supply 1? 
Cesarean/Delivery Service Space 
Labor Rooms 153 I I? 
Recovery Room 15 1 
Drug distribution station 1 
Cesarean operating room 210.33 
Delivery room ps5 
LDR or LDRP room PES 1 1 
Staff lounge 
Staff Toilet - Male 1? 1:1-15 
Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-15 
Waiting area/room 
Public Toilet - Male 1? 1 
Public Toilet - Female 1? 1 
Clinical Laboratory Service Space! 1 
Dietetic Service Space 1 
Kitchen [a 
Dining Area 115 12% 
Food serving area 15 
Food Preparation 15? 
Dietary Staff Toilet - Male 1? 1:1-15 
Dietary Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-15 
Emergency Service 1 
Open plan 1:4 cubicles 1 
Observation unit(s) 1:4 cubicles 1:6 beds 
Т сааса Emergency surgery, Cystoscopy, 1^5 
Intensive Care Units? 1 1 
Open plan 1:3 beds? 
Patient rooms? 1 
Newborn Intensive Care Unit (NICU) 1:4 bassinets!” 3 1 1 
Treatment area/room 1 
Control station 
Staff lounge 
Staff Toilet - Male 
Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-15 


76 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 4-2 
[OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5]?4 MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES (continued) 
эмсе x pecu Er აიი 
Employee dressing rooms and lockers 
Staff Toilet - Male 12 1:1-15 
Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-15 
Exam and treatment rooms 1 
Housekeeping room! 1 
Laboratories 15 
Laundry soiled linen, receiving, holding and sorting 1 
Medicine preparation room 1? 
Morgue and Autopsy 1 
Nourishment area 1+1? 
Nuclear Medicine room 1 
Mold room 1 
Patient room 1 
Patient toilet and bath facilities? I 1:4 beds 1:12 
Central bathing facility 1 1 1 
Special bathing facility 1 
Nurse Station 1 1" 
Newborn/well baby nursery 1:6 bassinets” 
Workroom 15 
Gastrointestinal endoscopy procedure room 15 
Outpatient observation” 1 1 
Pediatric and Adolescent Unit toilet room 1226 1% 
Pharmacy 1” 
Staff Toilet - Male 1? 1:1-15 
Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-15 
Compounding area for parenteral solutions 15 
Postanesthesia care units (PACU) 1? 1:16 beds 1 
Open plan აიი. 
Individual rooms 15 
Preoperative patient holding 1? 1:16 beds 
Protective environment room 15 
Protective environment anteroom 12033 
Protective environment toilet room P г Г 
Psychiatric unit patient room 13% 1 
Radiological/Imaging Services Space 1? 
Mammography 1 
Interventional imaging 1 
Ultrasound’ 1 1? 
Angiography 143 
Fluoroscopy? I? 
MRI 1 
CT Scan 1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 77 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 4-2 
[OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5]"* MINIMUM PLUMBING FACILITIES (continued) 
= E dE აიიი E 
Class 1 Imaging 1 
Staff Toilet’? - Male 1? 1:1-15 
Staff Toilet’! - Female 75 1:1-15 
Rehabilitation Therapy Space 
Training toilet 1 
Physical therapy service space 1 
Occupational therapy service space 1 
Speech pathology 1 
Infusion Therapy 1 
Renal Dialysis Service Space 1:4 stations 1 
Bloodborne Infection Isolation Room 1 
Nurses 'station 1 
Medication dispensing 1 
Home training room 1 
Repair room” 1 1 
Dialysis patient toilet 12 1 
Staff lounge 
Staff Toilet - Male 1 1:1-15 1 shower 
Staff Toilet - Female 1 1:1-15 1 shower 
Surgical Service Space 233 1 
Staff clothing change areas 
Staff Toilet - Male 1? 1:1-1537 1 shower 
Staff Toilet - Female 1? 1:1-1537 1 shower 
Clean-up rooms 1 
Substerile area 1 
Anesthesia workroom 1 
Soiled workroom or soiled holding 1 134 
Cancer treatment/infusion therapy treatment 1:4 stations 
Utility/Work Room 
Clean?! 1 
Soiled’? 1 17% 
Patient beds [Skilled Nursing/Intermediate Care 142 1:4 1:20 
Facilities] [medical model] 
СИА Rud facilities"? [Correctional 1:82 1:6 1:12 
Airborne infection isolation anteroom® [Correctional 16 16 16 
Treatment Center] 
Airborne infection isolation anteroom [Correctional 1 
Treatment Center] 
Protective environment room [Correctional Treat- 16 16 16 
ment Center] 
Protective environment anteroom [Correctional 1 


Treatment Center] 


Notes: 


1 Each department or nursing unit shall be served by a housekeeping room equipped with a service sink. Departments may share service closets provided the 
departmental services are compatible. A dedicated housekeeping room shall be provided for the following services: Surgical/Catherization, ICU, NICU, 


nursery, dietary, renal dialysis and outpatient surgery. 


78 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


Conventional spouts and controls on hot-and cold-water supplies are acceptable. Aerators are not permitted. Non-aerating laminar flow devices are permitted. 
Nourishment areas shall have a handwashing fixture in or immediately accessible from the nourishment area, in addition to a nourishment sink. 


Scrub sinks shall be located outside of sterile procedure rooms. A minimum of two scrub sinks shall be provided in a surgical unit containing one operating 
room. Four scrub sinks shall be provided in surgical units containing two operating rooms. One additional scrub sink shall be provided per each additional 
operating room. 


The scrub sink is in addition to the required number for surgeries. 
The following fixtures shall be provided in airborne infection or protective environment rooms of hospitals only: 


a. Within an adjoining toilet room, a lavatory, a shower containing a seat or a space for a shower chair, and toilet equipped with bedpan flushing attachment 
with a vacuum breaker. 


b. A handwashing fixture within a separate anteroom. 
The following fixtures shall be provided in isolation rooms of correctional treatment centers only: 


a. Within an adjoining toilet area, a handwashing fixture, a shower containing a seat or a space for a shower chair, and water closet equipped with bedpan 
flushing attachment with a vacuum breaker. 


b. A handwashing fixture within a separate anteroom. 

Includes burn center spaces, acute respiratory-care service spaces, and coronary-care service spaces. 
A toilet room with handwashing fixture shall directly adjoin each procedure room. 

One toilet with lavatory and one shower may serve two labor rooms. 

10 One additional scrub sink for each additional cesarean or delivery operating room. 

П Provide emergency eye-wash and shower. 

42 Conveniently located for staff use. 


13 Fixtures serving individual patient rooms shall not be considered as meeting the required ratios for bedrooms not served by individual adjoining toilet or bath- 
rooms. 


14 The clinic sink may be deleted if all bedrooms in the nursing unit are provided with adjoining toilets with bedpan flushing devices. 

15 Conventional controls on hot-and cold-water supplies are acceptable. The water discharge points shall be 5 inches (127 millimeters) above the fixture rim. 
Aerators are not permitted. Non-aerating laminar flow devices are permitted. 

j 5 Plumbing fixtures for public use shall be readily accessible and are to be based on 50% of the seating capacity value. Fixture quantity shall be based on Table 
422.1 for an occupancy group A2. 

Tina multiple-bed room, every bed position shall be within 20 feet (6 meters) of a hands-free handwashing fixture. Where an individual room concept is used, 
a handwashing fixture shall be provided within each infant care room. 


7 
8 
9 


18 When three or more procedure rooms are provided. 

19 If a separate medicine room is provided, the room shall be equipped with a sink in addition to the nurses' station handwashing fixture. Hot-water supplies 
are optional. 

? Where the patient room can only be accessed through the ante room the handwash fixture may be omitted in the patient room. 

21 Handwashing fixtures тау be deleted if room is used for storage and holding only. 


22 If room is used only for temporary holding of soiled materials, clinic sink and work counter may be omitted. If the flushing-rim clinical sink is eliminated, 
facilities for cleaning bedpans shall be provided elsewhere. 


?3 Toilet shall be equipped with a bedpan flushing attachment. 

7? Optional services approved by the licensing agency shall comply with the applicable space requirements of OSHPD 1 and 2. 
25 Shall be provided in each separate room where open medication is handled. 

26 Conveniently accessible throughout the unit. 

27 Includes rooms or areas within coronary and intensive-care units and postanethesia recovery rooms. 


?8 Modular toilet/sink combination units located within a privacy curtain may be used within individual patient space or private room. The toilet fixture shall 
be completely contained within cabinetry when not in use, and shall be enclosed when flushed. Bedpan washers shall not be permitted in patient bedrooms. 


29 In service spaces with procedure rooms that do not have dedicated patient toilets, provide a minimum of one patient toilet room with a separate handwash- 
ing fixture within the service space. 


30 Toilet room shall be accessible from the procedure room. 
3! Scrub sink shall be located outside the staff entrance to the procedure room. 
32 Not used. 


33 Handwashing and scrub sink fixtures shall not be equipped with wrist or elbow blades but shall be equipped with sensor controls, or controls that do not 
involve contact with the upper extremities. 


34 If room is used only for temporary holding of soiled material, clinic sink and work counter may be omitted. 


35 4 minimum of one separate accessible toilet room shall be provided for the use of patients. Patient toilet room(s) shall be equipped with a handwashing fix- 
ture and shall be accessible to the observation units(s) from the corridor. Reference CBC, Part 2, Section 1224.39.6. 


3 6 Handwashing stations are required in patient toilet rooms. Handwashing stations are not required in patient bedrooms. 
37 Staff toilet facilities located in the surgical unit can be applied to the total fixture count. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 79 


PLUMBING FIXTURES AND FIXTURE FITTINGS 


TABLE 4-3 [AGR] 
WATER CLOSETS URINALS (TROUGH URINAL LAVATORIES DRINKING 
TYPE OF BUILDING (FIXTURES PER PERSON)’ TO INDIVIDUAL (FIXTURES BATHTUBS OR SHOWERS FOUNTAINS 
OR OCCUPANCY URINAL EQUIVALENCE) (FIXTURES PER PERSON) (FIXTURES 
MALE PER PERSON) PER PERSON)? 
MALE FEMALE 
Nonindustrial—office |1 1-15 1 1-15  |Length of Number of |1 1-15 1:10 persons per shift — 
buildings, public build- |2 16-35 2 16-35 [trough urinal | individual |2 16-35 required to shower 
ings and similar estab- |3 36-55 3 36-55 urinals |3 36-60 
lishments 4 56-80 4 56-80 4 61-90 
5 81-110 5 81-110 |24" (610 mm) 1 |5 91-125 
6 111-150 6 111-150 36” (914 mm) 2 |1 additional for each 
1 additional for each 48" (1219 mm) 2  |additional 4 employ- 
additional 40 employees |60" (1524 mm) 3 |ees or fraction thereof 
or fraction thereof 
Industrial-factories, 1 1-15 1 1-15 24" (610 mm) 1 1to100 1:10 persons per shift = 
warehouses, loft build- |2 16-35 2 16-35 |36" (914 тт) 2 employees required to shower 
ings and similar estab- |3 36-55 3 36-55 48" (1219 тт) 2 per 10 
lishments 4 56-80 4 56-80 |60" (1524 тт) 3 
5 81-110 5 81-110 | 72" (1829 тт) 4 | Over 100 employees 1 
6 111-150 6 111-150 additional for each 
1 additional for each additional 15 employ- 
additional 40 employees ees or fraction thereof 
or fraction thereof 


Notes: 

The figures shown are based on one fixture being the minimum required for the number of persons indicated or any fraction thereof. 

Each water closet shall occupy a separate compartment which shall be equipped with a door, door latch and clothes hook. The door and the walls or partitions between 
fixtures shall be sufficient to assure privacy. 

Drinking fountains shall not be located in toilet rooms. 
^ Washing facilities shall be reasonably accessible to all employees. 
> Toilet ‘facilities shall be accessible to the employees at all times. Where practicable, toilet facilities should be within 200 feet (61 m) of locations at which workers are reg- 
ularly employed and should not be more than one floor-to-floor flight of stairs from working areas. 

Urinals may be installed instead of water closets in toilet rooms to be used only by men provided that the number of water closets shall not be less than two thirds of the 
minimum number of toilet facilities specified. The length of trough urinals to the equivalent number of individual urinals shall be based on the above table. 

When there are less than five employees, separate toilet rooms for each sex are not required provided toilet rooms can be locked from the inside and contain at least one 
water closet. 

Twenty-four linear inches of wash sink or 18 inches of circular basin, when provided with water outlets for such space, shall be considered equivalent to one lavatory. 
Exception: The requirements of Table 4-3 do not apply to mobile crews or to normally unattended work locations provided employees at these locations have immediately 
available transportation to nearby toilet facilities which meet the requirements of Table 4-3. 


[TEM 


თ 


ч 


оо 


TABLE 4-4 [DPH] 
TYPE OF BUILDING WATER CLOSETS URINALS LAVATORIES BATHTUBS OR SHOWERS | DRINKING FOUNTAINS 
OR OCCUPANCY? | (FIXTURES PER PERSON) | (FIXTURES PER MALE) | (FIXTURES PER PERSON) | (FIXTURES PER PERSON) | (FIXTURES PER PERSON) 
Day Use Public | Male Female || May be substituted for 
Beaches? 1 1-100 1 1-100 (up to two-thirds of the 
No sex designated water closets required 
1 1-500 
Minimum of 2 
Picnic Areas Male Female 
1 1-50 1 1-50 
Overnight Use 1 1-7.5 campsites? May be substituted for 1 1-12.5 campsites* 
Public Beaches? |1 1-7.5 campsites? up to one-third of the 
water closets required? 
Organized Camps |1 1-15? 1 1-15 1 1-156 Міпітит 1 рег сатр 


Notes: 

! Toilets shall be located in accordance with actual use patterns on the beach. The reasonable intent of the toilet requirements is that it should apply on the basis of aver- 
age daily use during periods of peak use. The health officer may determine how many days the population standard may be exceeded. 

Laundry facilities are not required, but if they are provided, must be a minimum of two laundry trays or a washing machine. 

Toilet facilities shall not be farther than 400 feet from any lot or campsite. 

Showers are not required, but it provided, they shall be provided on the indicated ratio. Outdoor rinse-off showers may be cold water only. 

Toilets shall be located within 300 feet from the living accommodations they serve. 

Showers shall be provided in the living area or in a centrally located structure. 

Exception: Intermittent short-term organized camps are not required to provide shower facilities, but it provided, they shall comply with this part. 


2 
3 
4 
5 
6 


80 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 5 - WATER HEATERS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 


Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 1AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X XX XX XI XI XX XIX 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X XX X 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections X 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


501.2 
507.2 X ХХ X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 81 


82 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 5 
WATER HEATERS 


501.0 General. 


501.1 Applicability. The regulations of this chapter shall gov- 
ern the construction, location, and installation of fuel-burning 
and other types of water heaters heating potable water, together 
with chimneys, vents, and their connectors. The minimum 
capacity for storage water heaters shall be in accordance with 
| the first-hour rating listed in Table 501.1(2). A list of accepted 
water heater appliance standards is referenced in Table 501.1(1). 
Listed appliances shall be installed in accordance with the man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions. Unlisted water heaters shall 
be permitted in accordance with Section 504.32. 
Water heaters shall be installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. The final installation 
shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


TABLE 501.1(1) 
WATER HEATERS 


[| TYPE* STANDARD 
Electric, Household Storage UL 174 
Oil-Fired Storage Tank UL 732 


Gas-Fired, 75 000 Btu/h or less, 
Storage 

Gas-Fired, Above 75 000 Btu/h, 
Storage and Instantaneous 


CSA/ANSI Z21.10.1/CSA 4.1 


CSA/ANSI Z21.10.3/CSA 4.3 


Electric, Commercial Storage UL 1453 
Solid Fuel-Fired UL 2523 
Electric Instantaneous UL 499 


For SI units: 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW 


| * Dual purpose water heaters shall be installed in accordance with this code 
and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


501.2 California Energy Code Water Heating System 
Requirements. [CEC] See California Energy Code Section 
110.3 for additional mandatory requirements for all service 
water heating systems, and 150.0(n) for additional mandatory 
requirements for residential service water heating systems. 


502.0 Permits. 


502.1 General. It shall be unlawful for a person to install, 
remove, or replace or cause to be installed, removed, or 
replaced a water heater without first obtaining a permit from 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction to do so. 


503.0 Inspection. 


503.1 Inspection of Chimneys or Vents. This inspec- 
tion shall be made after chimneys, vents, or parts thereof, 
authorized by the permit, have been installed and before such 
vent or part thereof has been covered or concealed. 


503.2 Final Water Heater Inspection. This inspection 
shall be made after work authorized by the permit has been 
installed. The Authority Having Jurisdiction will make such 
inspection as deemed necessary to be assured that the work 
has been installed in accordance with the intent of this code. 
No appliance or part thereof shall be covered or concealed 
until the same has been inspected and approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


504.0 Water Heater Requirements. 


504.1 Location. Water heater installations in bedrooms and 
bathrooms shall comply with one of the following [NFPA 
54:10.27.1]: 


(1) Water heater shall be of the direct-vent type. [NFPA 
54:10.27.1(2)] 


(2) Fuel-burning water heaters shall be permitted to be 
installed in a closet located in the bedroom or bathroom 
provided the closet is equipped with a listed, gasketed 
door assembly and a listed self-closing device. The self- 
closing door assembly shall meet the requirements of 
Section 504.1.1. The door assembly shall be installed 
with a threshold and bottom door seal and shall meet the 
requirements of Section 504.1.2. Combustion air for such 
installations shall be obtained from the outdoors in accor- 
dance with Section 506.4. The closet shall be for the 
exclusive use of the water heater. 


504.1.1 Self-Closing Doors. Self-closing doors shall 
swing easily and freely, and shall be equipped with a 
self-closing device to cause the door to close and latch 
each time it is opened. The closing mechanism shall not 
have a hold-open feature. 


504.1.2 Gasketing. Gasketing on gasketed doors or 
frames shall be furnished in accordance with the pub- 
lished listings of the door, frame, or gasketing material 
manufacturer. 


TABLE 501.1(2) 
FIRST HOUR RATING! 


Number of Bathrooms 1to 1.5 2 to 2.5 3 to 3.5 

Number of Bedrooms 1 2 3 2 3 4 5 3 4 5 6 
First Hour Rating,” Gallons 38 49 49 49 62 62 74 62 74 74 74 
For SI units: 1 gallon = 3.785 L 

Notes: 


! The first-hour rating is found on the “Energy Guide" label. 


? Solar water heaters shall be sized to meet the appropriate first-hour rating as shown in the table. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


83 


WATER HEATERS 


Exception: Where acceptable to the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, gasketing of non-combustible or limited- 
combustible material shall be permitted to be applied to 
the frame, provided closing and latching of the door are 
not inhibited. 


504.2 Vent. Water heaters of other than the direct-vent type 
shall be located as close as practical to the chimney or gas vent. 


504.3 Clearance. The clearance requirements for water 
heaters shall comply with Section 504.3.1 or Section 504.3.2. 


504.3.1 Listed Water Heaters. The clearances shall 
not be such as to interfere with combustion air, draft hood 
clearance and relief, and accessibility for servicing. Listed 
water heaters shall be installed in accordance with their 
listings and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


504.3.2 Unlisted Water Heaters. Except as otherwise 
permitted in this code, unlisted water heaters shall be 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction prior to 
being installed. Clearance for unlisted water heaters shall 
be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) on all sides. Com- 
bustible floors under unlisted water heaters shall be pro- 
tected in an approved manner. {NFPA 54-2018:10.27.2.2} 


504.4 Pressure-Limiting Devices. A water heater instal- 
lation shall be provided with overpressure protection using 
an approved, listed device installed in accordance with the 
terms of its listing and the manufacturer’s installation instruc- 
tions. Pressure relief devices shall have a pressure setting 
greater than the water service pressure and not exceed 150 
psi (1034 kPa) as required in Section 608.4. 


504.5 Temperature Limiting Devices. A water heater 
installation or a hot water storage vessel installation shall be 
provided with overtemperature protection by means of an 
approved, listed device installed in accordance with the terms 
of its listing and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 
{NFPA 54:10.26.5} 


504.6 Temperature, Pressure, and Vacuum Relief 
Devices. Temperature, pressure, and vacuum relief devices 
or combinations thereof, and automatic gas shutoff devices 
shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their list- 
ings and the manufacturer’s installation instructions. A shut- 
off valve shall not be placed between the relief valve and the 
water heater or on discharge pipes between such valves and 
the atmosphere. The hourly British thermal units (Btu) 
(kWeh) discharge capacity or the rated steam relief capacity 
of the device shall be not less than the input rating of the 
water heater. {NFPA 54:10.26.6} Discharge piping shall be 
installed in accordance with Section 608.5. 


504.7 Lead Content. Water heaters shall comply with the 
lead content requirements of Section 604.2. 


505.0 Oil-Burning and Other Water Heaters. 


505.1 Water Heaters. Water heaters deriving heat from 
fuels or types of energy other than gas shall comply with the 
standards referenced in Table 501.1(1), Section 505.3, or Sec- 
tion 505.4. Vents or chimneys for such appliances shall be of 
approved types. An adequate supply of air for combustion 
and for adequate ventilation of heater rooms or compartments 
shall be provided. Each such appliance shall be installed in a 


84 


location approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction and 
local and state fire-prevention agencies. 


505.2 Safety Devices. Storage-type water heaters and hot 
water boilers deriving heat from fuels or types of energy other 
than gas, shall be provided with, in addition to the primary 
temperature controls, an over-temperature safety protection 
device that complies with and is installed in accordance with 
nationally recognized applicable standards for such devices 
and a combination temperature and pressure-relief valve. 


505.3 Oil-Fired Water Heaters. Oil-fired water heaters 
shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 31. 


505.4 Indirect-Fired Water Heaters. Indirect-fired water 
heaters shall be in accordance with the applicable sections of 
the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code or shall comply 
with one of the other applicable standards shown in Table 
501.1(1). Each water heater shall bear a label in accordance with 
ASME requirements, or an approved testing agency, certifying 
and attesting that such an appliance has been tested, inspected 
and meets the requirements of the applicable standards or code. 


505.4.1 Single-Wall Heat Exchanger. An indirect- 
fired water heater that incorporates a single-wall heat 
exchanger shall be in accordance with the following 
requirements: 


(1) The heat transfer medium shall be either potable 
water or contain fluids recognized as safe by the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as food grade. 


(2) Bear a label with the word “Caution,” followed by 
the following statements: 


(a) The heat-transfer medium shall be potable 
water or other nontoxic fluid recognized as safe 
by the FDA. 


(b) The maximum operating pressure of the heat 
exchanger shall not exceed the maximum oper- 
ating pressure of the potable water supply. 


(3) The word “Caution” and the statements in letters 
shall have an uppercase height of not less than 0.120 
of an inch (3.048 mm). The vertical spacing between 
lines of type shall be not less than 0.046 of an inch 
(1.168 mm). Lowercase letters shall be compatible 
with the uppercase letter size specification. 


506.0 Air for Combustion and Ventilation. 


506.1 General. Air for combustion, ventilation, and dilu- 
tion of flue gases for appliances installed in buildings shall 
be obtained by application of one of the methods covered in 
Section 506.2 through Section 506.7.3. Where the require- 
ments of Section 506.2 are not met, outdoor air shall be intro- 
duced in accordance with methods covered in Section 506.4 
through Section 506.7.3. 


Exception: This provision shall not apply to direct vent appli- 
ances. {NFPA 54:9.3.1.1} 


506.1.1 Other Types of Appliances. Appliances of 
other than natural draft design, appliances not designated 
as Category I vented appliances, and appliances equipped 
with power burners shall be provided with combustion, 
ventilation, and dilution air in accordance with the appli- 
ance manufacturer's instructions. [NFPA 54:9.3.1.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


506.1.2 Draft Hood and Regulators. Where used, a 
draft hood or a barometric draft regulator shall be installed 
in the same room or enclosure as the appliance served so as 
to prevent any difference in pressure between the hood or 
regulator and the combustion air supply. [NFPA 54:9.3.1.4] 


506.1.3 Makeup Air. Where exhaust fans, clothes dry- 
ers, and kitchen ventilation systems interfere with the 
operation of appliances, makeup air shall be provided. 
[NFPA 54:9.3.1.5] 


506.2 Indoor Combustion Air. The required volume of 
indoor air shall be determined in accordance with the method 
in Section 506.2.1 or Section 506.2.2 except that where the air 
infiltration rate is known to be less than 0.40 ACH (air change 
per hour), the method in Section 506.2.2 shall be used. The 
total required volume shall be the sum of the required vol- 
ume calculated for all appliances located within the space. 
Rooms communicating directly with the space in which the 
appliances are installed through openings not furnished with 
doors, and through combustion air openings sized and located 
in accordance with Section 506.3, are considered a part of the 
required volume. [NFPA 54:9.3.2] 


506.2.1 Standard Method. The minimum required 
volume shall be 50 cubic feet per 1000 British thermal 
units per hour (Btu/h) (4.83 m/kW). [NFPA 54:9.3.2.1] 
506.2.2 Known Air Infiltration Rate Method. 
Where the air infiltration rate of a structure is known, the 
minimum required volume shall be determined as fol- 
lows [NFPA 54:9.3.2.2]: 
(1) For appliances other than fan-assisted, calculate 
using the following Equation 506.2.2(1). [NFPA 
54:9.3.2.2(1)] 


[Equation 506.2.2(1)] 
| 2118 Í oth 
Required Volume, > ACH c EU ) 


(2) For fan-assisted appliances, calculate using the fol- 
lowing Equation 506.2.2(2). [NFPA 54:9.3.2.2(2)] 


[Equation 506.2.2(2)] 
: 15 fe Г fan 
Required Volume n 2 (ao 
Where: 
lother = АП appliances other than fan-assisted input 


in (Btu/h) 
Гуа п  ^Fan-assisted appliance input іп (Btu/h) 
ACH = Air change per hour (percent of volume of 
space exchanged per hour, expressed as a 
decimal) 
For SI units: 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m°, 1000 British thermal units 
per hour = 0.293 kW 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


(3) For purposes of these calculations, an infiltration 
rate greater than 0.60 ACH shall not be used in 
Equation 506.2.2(1) and Equation 506.2.2(2). 
[NFPA 54:9.3.2.2(3)] 


506.3 Indoor Opening Size and Location. Openings 
used to connect indoor spaces shall be sized and located in 
accordance with the following: 


(1) Combining spaces on the same story. Each opening shall 
have a minimum free area of 1 square inch per 1000 
Btu/h (0.002 m?/kW) of the total input rating of all appli- 
ances in the space but not less than 100 square inches 
(0.065 m?). One permanent opening shall commence 
within 12 inches (305 mm) of the top of the enclosure 
and one permanent opening shall commence within 12 
inches (305 mm) of the bottom of the enclosure (see Fig- 
ure 506.3). The minimum dimension of air openings 
shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm). 


(2) Combining spaces in different stories. The volumes of 
spaces in different stories shall be considered as com- 
municating spaces where such spaces are connected by 
one or more permanent openings in doors or floors hav- 
ing a total minimum free area of 2 square inches per 1000 
Btu/h (0.004 m?/kW) of total input rating of all appli- 
ances. [NFPA 54:9.3.2.3] 


|«*—— Chimney or gas vent 


FIGURE 506.3 
ALL COMBUSTION AIR FROM ADJACENT INDOOR SPACES 
THROUGH INDOOR COMBUSTION AIR OPENINGS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.9.3.2.3(1)] 


506.4 Outdoor Combustion Air. Outdoor combustion air 
shall be provided through opening(s) to the outdoors in accor- 
dance with the methods in Section 506.4.1 or Section 506.42. 
The minimum dimension of air openings shall not be less than 
3 inches (76 mm). [NFPA 54:9.3.3] 
506.4.1 Two Permanent Openings Method. Two 
permanent openings, one commencing within 12 inches 


85 


WATER HEATERS 


«—— Chimney or gas vent 


Ventilation louvers 
(each end of attic) 


Alternate 
air inlet 


Ventilation louvers for 
unheated crawl space 


FIGURE 506.4.1(1) 
ALL COMBUSTION AIR FROM OUTDOORS - 
INLET AIR FROM VENTILATED CRAWL SPACE AND 
OUTLET AIR TO VENTILATED ATTIC 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.9.3.3.1(1)(a)] 


|«—— Chimney or gas vent 


Ventilation louvers 
(each end of attic) 


Outlet air 


Inlet air duct 
[ends 1 foot 
above floor] 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm 
FIGURE 506.4.1(2) 
ALL COMBUSTION AIR FROM OUTDOORS 
THROUGH VENTILATED ATTIC 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.9.3.3.1(1)(b)] 


86 


|«*—— Chimney or gas vent 


FIGURE 506.4.1(3) 
ALL COMBUSTION AIR FROM 
OUTDOORS THROUGH HORIZONTAL DUCTS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.9.3.3.1(2)] 


Chimney or gas vent 


Opening 


Alternate 
opening 
location 


FIGURE 506.4.2 
ALL COMBUSTION AIR FROM OUTDOORS THROUGH 
SINGLE COMBUSTION AIR OPENING 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.9.3.3.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(305 mm) of the top of the enclosure and one commenc- 
ing within 12 inches (305 mm) of the bottom of the enclo- 
sure, shall be provided. The openings shall communicate 
directly, or by ducts, with the outdoors or spaces that 
freely communicate with the outdoors, as follows: 


(1) Where directly communicating with the outdoors or 
where communicating to the outdoors through ver- 
tical ducts, each opening shall have a minimum free 
area of 1 square inch per 4000 Btu/h (0.0005 
m?/kW) of total input rating of all appliances in the 
enclosure. [See Figure 506.4.1(1) and Figure 
506.4.1(2)] 


(2) Where communicating with the outdoors through 
horizontal ducts, each opening shall have a mini- 
mum free area of 1 square inch per 2000 Btu/h 
(0.001 m?/kW) of total input rating of all appliances 
in the enclosure. [NFPA 54:9.3.3.1] [See Figure 
506.4.1(3)] 


506.4.2 One Permanent Opening Method. One per- 
manent opening, commencing within 12 inches (305 mm) 
of the top of the enclosure, shall be provided. The appli- 
ance shall have clearances of at least 1 inch (25.4 mm) 
from the sides and back and 6 inches (152 mm) from the 
front of the appliance. The opening shall directly com- 
municate with the outdoors or shall communicate through 
a vertical or horizontal duct to the outdoors or spaces that 
freely communicate with the outdoors (see Figure 
506.4.2) and shall have a minimum free area of the fol- 
lowing: 
(1) One square inch per 3000 Btu/h (0.0007 m?/kW) of 
the total input rating of all appliances located in the 
enclosure. 


(2) Not less than the sum of the areas of all vent con- 
nectors in the space. [NFPA 54:9.3.3.2] 


506.5 Combination Indoor and Outdoor Combustion 
Air. The use of a combination of indoor and outdoor com- 
bustion air shall be in accordance with Section 506.5.1 
through Section 506.5.3. [NFPA 54:9.3.4] (See Appendix J 
for example calculations) 


506.5.1 Indoor Openings. Where used, openings 
connecting the interior spaces shall comply with Section 
506.3. [NFPA 54:9.3.4(1)] 


506.5.2 Outdoor Opening(s) Location. Outdoor 
opening(s) shall be located in accordance with Section 
506.4. [NFPA 54:9.3.4(2)] 


506.5.3 Outdoor Opening(s) Size. The outdoor 
opening(s) size shall be calculated in accordance with the 
following: 


(1) Theratio ofthe interior spaces shall be the available 
volume of all communicating spaces divided by the 
required volume. 

(2) The outdoor size reduction factor shall be 1 minus 
the ratio of interior spaces. 

(3) The minimum size of outdoor opening(s) shall be 
the full size of outdoor opening(s) calculated in 
accordance with Section 506.4, multiplied by the 
reduction factor. The minimum dimension of air 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


openings shall not be less than 3 inches (76 mm). 
[NFPA 54:9.3.4(3)] 


506.6 Engineered Installations. Engineered combustion 
air installations shall provide an adequate supply of combus- 
tion, ventilation, and dilution air determined using engineer- 
ing methods. [NFPA 54:9.3.5] 


506.7 Mechanical Combustion Air Supply. Where all 
combustion air is provided by a mechanical air supply sys- 
tem, the combustion air shall be supplied from outdoors at 
the minimum rate of 0.35 cubic feet per minute per 1000 
Btu/h [0.034 (m?/miny'kW] for all appliances located within 
the space. [NFPA 54:9.3.6] 


506.71 Exhaust Fans. Where exhaust fans are 
installed, additional air shall be provided to replace the 
exhausted air. [NFPA 54:9.3.6.1] 


506.72 Interlock. Each of the appliances served shall 
be interlocked to the mechanical air supply system to pre- 
vent main burner operation where the mechanical air 
supply system is not in operation. [NFPA 54:9.3.6.2] 


506.73 Specified Combustion Air. Where combus- 
tion air is provided by the building's mechanical venti- 
lation system, the system shall provide the specified 
combustion air rate in addition to the required ventila- 
tion air. [NFPA 54:9.3.6.3] 


506.8 Louvers, Grilles, and Screens. The required size 
of openings for combustion, ventilation, and dilution air shall 
be based on the net free area of each opening. Where the free 
area through a design of louver, grille, or screen is known, it 
shall be used in calculating the size opening required to pro- 
vide the free area specified. Where the louver and grille 
design and free area are not known, it shall be assumed that 
wood louvers have 25 percent free area, and metal louvers 
and grilles have 75 percent free area. Nonmotorized louvers 
and grilles shall be fixed in the open position. [NFPA 
54:9.3.7.1] 


506.8.1 Minimum Screen Mesh Size. Screens shall 
not be smaller than М of an inch (6.4 mm) mesh. [NFPA 
54:9.3.7.2] 


506.8.2 Motorized Louvers. Motorized louvers shall 
be interlocked with the appliance so they are proven in 
the full open position prior to main burner ignition and 
during main burner operation. Means shall be provided to 
prevent the main burner from igniting should the louver 
fail to open during burner startup and to shut down the 
main burner if the louvers close during burner operation. 
[NFPA 54:9.3.7.3] 

506.9 Combustion Air Ducts. Combustion air ducts shall 

comply with the following [NFPA 54:9.3.8]: 

(1) Ducts shall be constructed of galvanized steel or a mate- 
rial having equivalent corrosion resistance, strength, and 
rigidity. 

Exception: Within dwellings units, unobstructed stud 
and joist spaces shall not be prohibited from conveying 


combustion air, provided that not more than one fire- 
block is removed. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.1] 


87 


WATER HEATERS 


(2) Ducts shall terminate in an unobstructed space, allowing 
free movement of combustion air to the appliances. 
[NFPA 54:9.3.8.2] 


(3) Ducts shall serve a single space. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.3] 


(4) Ducts shall not serve both upper and lower combustion 
air openings where both such openings are used. The sep- 
aration between ducts serving upper and lower combus- 
tion air openings shall be maintained to the source of 
combustion air. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.4] 


(5) Ducts shall not be screened where terminating in an attic 
space. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.5] 


(6) Combustion air intake openings located on the exterior of 
the building shall have the lowest side of the combustion 
air intake openings located at least 12 inches (305 mm) 
vertically from the adjoining finished ground level. 
[NFPA 54:9.3.8.8] 


(7) Horizontal upper combustion air ducts shall not slope 
downward toward the source of combustion air. [NFPA 
54:9.3.8.6] 


(8) The remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas 
vent, special gas vent, or plastic piping installed within a 
masonry, metal, or factory built chimney shall not be 
used to supply combustion air. 


Exception: Direct-vent appliances designed for installa- 
tion in a solid fuel-burning fireplace where installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instruc- 
tions. [NFPA 54:9.3.8.7] 


507.0 Appliance and Equipment Installation Require- 
ments. 


507.1 Dielectric Insulator. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall have the authority to require the use of an 
approved dielectric insulator on the water piping connections 
of water heaters and related water heating appliances. 


5072 Seismic Provisions. Water heaters shall be 
anchored or strapped to resist horizontal displacement due to 
earthquake motion. Strapping shall be at points within the 
upper one-third (73) and lower one-third (75) of its vertical 
dimensions. At the lower point, minimum a distance of not 
less than four (4) inches (102 mm) shall be maintained above 
the controls with the strapping. 


Note: [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Reference Health and Safety Code 
Section 19211(a) which addresses new, replacement, and 
existing water heaters. 


Note: The applicable subsection of Health and Safety Code Sec- 
tion 19211(a) which addresses new, replacement, and existing 
water heaters is repeated here for clarity and reads as follows: 


Section 19211(a) Notwithstanding Section 19100, all new 
and replacement water heaters, and all existing residential 
water heaters shall be braced, anchored, or strapped to resist 
falling or horizontal displacement due to earthquake motion. 
At a minimum, any water heater shall be secured in accor- 
dance with the California Plumbing Code, or modifications 
made thereto by a city, county, or city and county pursuant to 
Section 17958.5. 


507.3 Appliance Support. Appliances and equipment shall 
be furnished either with load distributing bases or with a suf- 


88 


ficient number of supports to prevent damage to either the 
building structure or the appliance and the equipment. [NFPA 
54:9.1.8.1] 


507.3.1 Structural Capacity. At the locations selected 
for installation of appliances and equipment, the dynamic 
and static load carrying capacities of the building struc- 
ture shall be checked to determine whether they are ade- 
quate to carry the additional loads. The appliances and 
equipment shall be supported and shall be connected to 
the piping so as not to exert undue stress on the connec- 
tions. [NFPA 54:9.1.8.2] 


5074 Ground Support. A water heater supported from the 
earth shall rest on level concrete or other approved base 
extending not less than 3 inches (76 mm) above the adjoining 
ground level. 


507.5 Drainage Pan. Where a water heater is located in an 
attic, in or on an attic ceiling assembly, floor-ceiling assem- 
bly, floor-subfloor assembly or where damage results from a | 
leaking water heater, a watertight pan of corrosion-resistant 
materials shall be installed beneath the water heater in accor- 
dance with the following: 


(1) The drainage pan shall be provided with not less than % 
of an inch (20 mm) diameter drain to an approved loca- 
tion. The terminating end of the drainpipe shall be read- 
ily visible. 

(2 


МУ 


The drainage pan shall be not less than 1% inches (38 | 
mm) in depth. 

(3) Where a drainage pan pipe is installed, the material of 
the piping shall be rated for the temperature rating of the 
water heater and shall be approved for use with the liq- 
uid being discharged. 


(4 


— 


Discharge from a relief valve into a drainage pan shall 
be prohibited. 


507.6 Added or Converted Equipment or Appliances. 

When additional or replacement appliances or equipment is 

installed or an appliance is converted to gas from another fuel, 

the location in which the appliances or equipment is to be 
operated shall be checked to verify the following: 

(1) Air for combustion and ventilation is provided where 
required, in accordance with the provisions of Section 
506.0. Where existing facilities are not adequate, they 
shall be upgraded to meet Section 506.0 specifications. 


(2 


МУ 


The installation components and appliances meet the 
clearances to combustible material provisions of Section 
507.26. It shall be determined that the installation and 
operation of the additional or replacement appliances do 
not render the remaining appliances unsafe for contin- 
ued operation. 


G 


МУ 


The venting system is constructed and sized in accor- 
dance with the provisions of Section 509.0. Where the 
existing venting system is not adequate, it shall be 
upgraded to comply with Section 509.0. [NFPA 54:9.1.2] 


507.7 Type of Gas(es). The appliance shall be connected to | 
the fuel gas for which it was designed. No attempt shall be made 
to convert the appliance from the gas specified on the rating 
plate for use with a different gas without consulting the instal- 
lation instructions, the serving gas supplier, or the appliance 
manufacturer for complete instructions. Listed appliances shall | 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


not be converted unless permitted by and in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.1.3] 
507.8 Safety Shutoff Devices for Unlisted LP-Gas 
Appliance Used Indoors. Unlisted appliances for use with 
| undiluted LP-Gases and installed indoors, except attended 
laboratory equipment, shall be equipped with safety shutoff 
devices of the complete shutoff type. [NFPA 54:9.1.4] 


507.9 Use of Air or Oxygen Under Pressure. Where air 
or oxygen under pressure is used in connection with the gas 
supply, effective means such as a backpressure regulator and 
relief valve shall be provided to prevent air or oxygen from 
passing back into the gas piping. Where oxygen is used, instal- 
lation shall be in accordance with NFPA 51. [NFPA 54:9.1.5] 


507.10 Protection of Gas Appliances from Fumes or 
Gases other than Products of Combustion. Non- 
direct-vent appliances installed in beauty shops, barber shops, 
or other facilities where chemicals that generate corrosive or 
flammable products such as aerosol sprays are routinely used 
shall be located in a mechanical room separate or partitioned 
off from other areas with provisions for combustion and dilu- 
tion air from outdoors. Direct-vent appliances in such facili- 
ties shall be in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's 
installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.1.6.2] 


507.11 Process Air. In addition to air needed for combus- 
tion in commercial or industrial processes, process air shall be 
provided as required for cooling of appliances, equipment, or 
material; for controlling dew point, heating, drying, oxida- 
tion, dilution, safety exhaust, odor control, and air for com- 
pressors; and for comfort and proper working conditions for 
personnel. [NFPA 54:9.1.7] 


50712 Flammable Vapors. Appliances shall not be 
installed in areas where the open use, handling, or dispensing 
of flammable liquids occurs, unless the design, operation, or 
installation reduces the potential of ignition of the flamma- 
ble vapors. Appliances installed in compliance with Section 
507.13 through Section 507.15 shall be considered to com- 
ply with the intent of this provision. [NFPA 54:9.1.9] 


507.13 Installation in Residential Garages. Appliances 
in residential garages and in adjacent spaces that open to the 
garage and are not part of the living space of a dwelling unit 
shall be installed so that all heating elements, switches, burn- 
ers, and burner-ignition devices are located not less than 18 
inches (457 mm) above the floor. 


Exception: Listed flammable vapor ignition resistant (FVIR) 
appliances. {NFPA 54:9.1.10.1} 


507.13.1 Physical Damage. Appliances installed in 
garages, warehouses, or other areas subject to mechani- 
cal damage shall be guarded against such damage by 
being installed behind protective barriers or by being ele- 
vated or located out of the normal path of vehicles. 


507.13.2 Access from the Outside. Where appli- 
ances are installed in a separate, enclosed space having 
access only from outside of the garage, such appliances 
shall be permitted to be installed at floor level, providing 
the required combustion air is taken from the exterior of 
the garage. [NFPA 54:9.1.10.3] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


507.14 Installation in Commercial Garages. Appliances 
installed in commercial garages shall comply with Section 
507.14.1 and Section 507.14.2. 


507.14.1 Parking Structures. Appliances installed in 
enclosed, basement, and underground parking structures 
shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 88A. [NFPA 
54:9.1.11.1] 


507.14.2 Repair Garages. Appliances installed in 
repair garages shall be installed in accordance with 
NFPA 30A. [NFPA 54:9.1.11.2] 


507.15 Installation in Aircraft Hangars. Heaters in air- 
craft hangars shall be installed in accordance with NFPA 409. 
[NFPA 54:9.1.12] 


507.16 Venting of Flue Gases. Appliances shall be vented 
in accordance with the provisions of Section 509.0. [NFPA 
54:9.1.14] 


507.17 Extra Device or Attachment. No device or attach- 
ment shall be installed on any appliance that could in any way 
impair the combustion of gas. [NFPA 54:9.1.15] 


507.18 Addition to Existing System. When additional | 
appliances are being connected to a gas piping system, the 
existing piping shall be checked to determine whether it has 
adequate capacity. If the capacity of the system is determined 
to be inadequate for the additional appliances, the existing 
system shall be enlarged as required, or separate gas piping of 
adequate capacity shall be provided. [NFPA 54:5.1.2] 


507.19 Avoiding Strain on Gas Piping. Appliances shall 
be supported and connected to the piping so as not to exert 
undue strain on the connections. [NFPA 54:9.1.16] 


507.20 Gas Appliance Pressure Regulators. Where the 
gas supply pressure is higher than that at which the appliance 
is designed to operate or varies beyond the design pressure 
limits of the appliance, a gas appliance pressure regulator 
listed in accordance with CSA/ANSI Z21.18/CSA 6.3 shall | 
be installed. [NFPA 54:9.1.17] 


-R 
507.21 Bleed Lines for Diaphragm-Type Valves. Bleed << 


lines shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) Diaphragm-type valves shall be equipped to convey 
bleed gas to the outdoors or into the combustion cham- 
ber adjacent to a continuous pilot. 


(2) In the case of bleed lines leading outdoors, means shall 
be employed to prevent water from entering this piping 
and also to prevent blockage of vents by insects and for- 
eign matter. 


(3) Bleed lines shall not terminate in the appliance flue or 
exhaust system. 


(4) In the case of bleed lines entering the combustion cham- 
ber, the bleed line shall be located so the bleed gas is 
readily ignited by the pilot and the heat liberated thereby 
does not adversely affect the normal operation of the 
safety shutoff system. The terminus of the bleed line 
shall be securely held in a fixed position relative to the 
pilot. For manufactured gas, the need for a flame arrester 
in the bleed line piping shall be determined. 


(5) A bleed line(s) from a diaphragm-type valve and a vent 
line(s) from an appliance pressure regulator shall not be 
connected to a common manifold terminating in a com- 


89 


WATER HEATERS 


bustion chamber. Bleed lines shall not terminate in pos- 
itive-pressure-type combustion chambers. [NFPA 
54:9.1.18] 


у) 50722 Combination of Appliances and Equipment. 


» 


Any combination of appliances, equipment, attachments, or 
devices used together in any manner shall comply with the 
standards that apply to the individual appliance and equip- 
ment. [NFPA 54:9.1.19] 


507.23 Installation Instructions. The installer shall con- 
form to the appliance and equipment manufacturers’ recom- 
mendations in completing an installation. The installer shall 
leave the manufacturers' installation, operating, and mainte- 
nance instructions on the premises. [NFPA 54:9.1.20] 


)) 50724 Protection of Outdoor Appliances. Appliances 


not listed for outdoor installation but installed outdoors shall 
be provided with protection to the degree that the environment 
requires. Appliances listed for outdoor installation shall be per- 
mitted to be installed without protection in accordance with 
| the manufacturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.1.21] 


уу 50725 Accessibility for Service. All appliances shall be 


located with respect to building construction and other equip- 
ment so as to permit access for repair or replacement of the 
appliance. Clearance shall be maintained to permit removal of 
the appliance; cleaning of heating surfaces; the replacement 
of filters, blowers, motors, burners, controls, and vent con- 
nections; the lubrication of moving parts where necessary; 
the adjustment and cleaning of burners and pilots; and the 
proper functioning of explosion vents, 1f provided. For attic 
installation, the passageway and servicing area adjacent to the 
| appliance shall be in accordance with Section 508.4. (NFPA 
54:9.2.1} 


Unless otherwise specified, clearances of not less than 
30 inches (762 mm) in depth, width, and height of working 
space shall be maintained. 


») 50726 Clearance to Combustible Materials. Appli- 


ances and their vent connectors shall be installed with clear- 
ances from combustible material so their operation does not 
create a hazard to persons or property. Minimum clearances 
between combustible walls and the back and sides of various 
conventional types of appliances and their vent connectors 
are specified in Section 509.0. [NFPA 54:9.2.2] 


508.0 Appliances on Roofs, in Attics or Under-Floor 
Spaces. 


508.1 General. Appliances on roofs shall be designed or 
enclosed so as to withstand climatic conditions in the area in 
which they are installed. Where enclosures are provided, each 
enclosure shall permit easy entry and movement, shall be of 
reasonable height, and shall have at least a 30 inch (762 mm) 
clearance between the entire service access panel(s) of the 
appliance, and the wall of the enclosure. [NFPA 54:9.4.1.1] 


508.1.1 Load Capacity. Roofs on which appliances 
are to be installed shall be capable of supporting the addi- 
tional load or shall be reinforced to support the additional 
load. [NFPA 54:9.4.1.2] 

508.1.2 Fasteners. All access locks, screws, and bolts 
shall be of corrosion-resistant material. [NFPA 54:9.4.1.3] 


90 


508.2 Installation of Appliances on Roofs. Appliances 
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.4.2.1] 


508.2.1 Edge of Roof Clearance. Appliances shall 
be installed on a well-drained surface of the roof. At least 
6 feet (1829 mm) of clearance shall be available between 
any part of the appliance and the edge of a roof or simi- 
lar hazard, or rigidly fixed rails, guards, parapets, or other 
building structures at least 42 inches (1067 mm) in height 
shall be provided on the exposed side. [NFPA 54:9.4.2.2] 


508.2.1.1 Guards and Rails. Guards or rails shall 
be required where the following exist: 


(1) The clearance between the appliance and a roof 
edge or open end of an equipment platform is 
less than 6 feet (1829 mm). 


(2) The open end of the equipment platform is 
located more than 30 inches (762 mm) above 
the roof, floor, or grade below. 


Where guards or rails are installed, they shall 
be constructed so as to prevent the passage of a 21 
inch (533 mm) diameter ball, resist the imposed 
loading conditions, and shall extend not less than 30 
inches (762 mm) beyond each side of the equipment 
or appliance. 


Exception: Guards shall not be required where a 
permanent fall arrest anchorage connector system in 
accordance with ASSP Z359.1 is installed. 


508.2.2 Electrical Power. Appliances requiring an 
external source of electrical power shall be installed in 
accordance with NFPA 70. [NFPA 54:9.4.2.3] 


508.2.3 Platform or Walkway. Where water stands on 
the roof at the appliance or in the passageways to the 
appliance, or where the roof is of a design having a water 
seal, a suitable platform, walkway, or both shall be pro- 
vided above the water line. Such platform(s) or walk- 
way(s) shall be located adjacent to the appliance and 
control panels so that the appliance can be safely serviced 
where water stands on the roof. [NFPA 54:9.4.2.4] 


508.3 Appliances on Roofs. Appliances located on roofs or 
other elevated locations shall be accessible. [NFPA 54:9.4.3.1] 


508.3.1 Access. Buildings of more than 15 feet (4572 
mm) in height shall have an inside means of access to 
the roof, unless other means acceptable to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction are used. [NFPA 54:9.4.3.2] 


508.3.2 Access Type. The inside means of access shall 
be a permanent or foldaway inside stairway or ladder, 
terminating in an enclosure, scuttle, or trapdoor. Such 
scuttles or trapdoors shall be at least 22 inches by 24 
inches (559 mm by 610 mm) in size, shall open easily 
and safely under all conditions, especially snow, and 
shall be constructed so as to permit access from the roof 
side unless deliberately locked on the inside. 

At least 6 feet (1829 mm) of clearance shall be avail- 
able between the access opening and the edge of the roof or 
similar hazard, or rigidly fixed rails or guards a minimum 
of 42 inches (1067 mm) in height shall be provided on the 
exposed side. Where parapets or other building structures 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


are utilized in lieu of guards or rails, they shall be a mini- 
mum of 42 inches (1067 mm) in height. [NFPA 54:9.4.3.3] 


508.3.3 Permanent Lighting. Permanent lighting 
shall be provided at the roof access. The switch for such 
lighting shall be located inside the building near the 
access means leading to the roof. [NFPA 54:9.4.3.4] 


508.4 Appliances in Attics and Under-Floor Spaces. 
An attic or under-floor space in which an appliance is 
installed shall be accessible through an opening and passage- 

| way larger than the largest component of the appliance, and 
not less than 22 inches by 30 inches (559 mm by 762 mm). 
{NFPA 54:9.5.1} 


508.4.1 Length of Passageway. Where the height of 
the passageway is less than 6 feet (1829 mm), the dis- 
tance from the passageway access to the appliance shall 
not exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) measured along the cen- 
terline of the passageway. [NFPA 54:9.5.1.1] Where the 
height of the passageway is 6 feet (1829 mm) or more, 
the distance from the passageway access to the appliance 
shall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm) measured along the 
centerline of the passageway. 


508.4.2 Width of Passageway. The passageway shall 
be unobstructed and shall have solid flooring not less 
than 24 inches (610 mm) wide from the entrance open- 
ing to the appliance. [NFPA 54:9.5.1.2] 


508.4.3 Work Platform. A level working platform not 
less than 30 inches by 30 inches (762 mm by 762 mm) 
shall be provided in front of the service side of the appli- 
ance. [NFPA 54:9.5.2] 


508.4.4 Lighting and Convenience Outlet. A per- 


| manent 120 V receptacle outlet and a luminaire shall be 
installed near the appliance. The switch controlling the 
| luminaire shall be located at the entrance to the passage- 


way. [NFPA 54:9.5.3] 


509.0 Venting of Appliances. 


509.1 Listing. Type B and Type B-W gas vents shall comply 
with UL 441, and Type L gas vents shall comply with UL 641. 


| 509.1.1 Installation. Listed chimneys and vents shall be 
installed in accordance with Section 509.0 and the manu- 
| facturers' installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.2.1] 


509.1.2 Prohibited Discharge. Appliance vents shall 
not discharge into a space enclosed by screens having 
openings less than М of an inch (6.4 mm) mesh. 


509.2 Connection to Venting Systems. Except as per- 
mitted in Section 509.2.1 through Section 509.2.7, all appli- 
ances shall be connected to venting systems. [NFPA 54:12.3.1] 


509.2.1 Appliances Not Required to be Vented. 
The following appliances shall not be required to be 
vented: 


(1) A single listed booster-type (automatic instanta- 
neous) water heater, when designed and used solely 
for the sanitizing rinse requirements of a dishwash- 
ing machine, provided that the appliance is installed 
with the draft hood in place and unaltered, if a draft 
hood is required, in a commercial kitchen having a 
mechanical exhaust system. [Where installed in this 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


manner, the draft hood outlet shall not be less than 
36 inches (914 mm) vertically and 6 inches (152 
mm) horizontally from any surface other than the 
appliance.] [NFPA 54:12.3.2(5)] 


(2) Other appliances listed for unvented use and not pro- 
vided with flue collars. [NFPA 54:12.3.2(10)] 


509.2.2 Maximum Input Rating. Where any or all of 
the appliances in Section 509.2.1(1) and Section 
509.2.1(2) are installed so the aggregate input rating 
exceeds 20 (Btu/h)/fP (207 W/m) of room or space in 
which it is installed, one or more shall be provided with 
venting systems or other approved means for conveying 
the vent gases to the outdoors so that the aggregate input 
rating of the remaining unvented appliances does not 
exceed 20 (Btu/h)/f? (207 W/m?). [NFPA 54:12.3.2.1] 


509.2.3 Adjacent Room or Space. Where the calcu- 
lation includes the volume of an adjacent room or space, 
the room or space in which the appliances are installed 
shall be directly connected to the adjacent room or space 
by a doorway, archway, or other opening of comparable 
size that cannot be closed. [NFPA 54:12.3.2.2] 


509.2.4 Ventilating Hoods. The use of ventilating 
hoods and exhaust systems to vent appliances shall be 
limited to industrial appliances and appliances installed 
in commercial applications. [NFPA 54:12.3.3] 


509.2.5 Well-Ventilated Spaces. The flue gases from 
industrial-type appliances shall not be required to be 
vented to the outdoors where such gases are discharged 
into a large and well-ventilated industrial space. [NFPA 
54:12.3.4] 
509.2.6 Direct-Vent Appliances. Listed direct vent | 
appliances shall be installed in accordance with the man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.3.5.1] | 
509.2.6.1 Through-the-Wall Vent Termination. 
Through-the-wall vent terminations for listed direct- 
vent appliances shall be in accordance with Section 
509.8.1. [NFPA 54:12.3.5.2] 
509.2.7 Appliances with Integral Vents. Appliances 
incorporating integral venting means shall be installed in 
accordance with Section 509.8. [NFPA 54:12.3.6] | 


509.3 Minimum Safe Performance. Venting systems 
shall be designed and constructed to convey all flue and vent 
gases to the outdoors. [NFPA 54:12.1] 


509.3.1 Appliance Draft Requirements. A venting 
system shall satisfy the draft requirements of the appli- 
ance in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
[NFPA 54:12.4.1] 


509.3.2 Appliance Venting Requirements. Appli- 
ances required to be vented shall be connected to a vent- 
ing system designed and installed in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 509.4 through Section 509.15. 
[NFPA 54:12.4.2] 

509.3.3 Mechanical Draft Systems. Mechanical 
draft systems shall be listed in accordance with UL 378 
and installed in accordance with both the appliance and 


the mechanical draft system manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. [NFPA 54:12.4.3.1] 


91 


WATER HEATERS 


509.3.3.1 Venting. Appliances requiring venting 
shall be permitted to be vented by means of mechan- 
ical draft systems of either forced or induced draft 
design. [NFPA 54:12.4.3.2] 


turer's installation instructions shall identify the specific 
plastic piping material. The plastic pipe venting materi- 
als shall be labeled in accordance with the product stan- 
dards specified by the appliance manufacturer or shall be 
listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1738. [NFPA 


509.3.3.2 Leakage. Forced draft systems and all 
portions of induced draft systems under positive 
pressure during operation shall be designed and 
installed so as to prevent leakage of flue or vent 
gases into a building. [NFPA 54:12.4.3.3] 


509.3.3.3 Vent Connectors. Vent connectors 
serving appliances vented by natural draft shall not 
be connected into any portion of mechanical draft 
systems operating under positive pressure. [NFPA 
54:12.4.3.4] 


509.3.3.4 Operation. Where a mechanical draft 
system is employed, provision shall be made to pre- 
vent the flow of gas to the main burners when the 
draft system 1s not performing so as to satisfy the 
operating requirements of the appliance for safe per- 
formance. [NFPA 54:12.4.3.5] 


509.3.4 Ventilating Hoods and Exhaust Systems. 
Where automatically operated appliances, other than 
food service appliances, are vented through a ventilating 
hood or exhaust system equipped with a damper or with 
a power means of exhaust, provisions shall be made to 
allow the flow of gas to the main burners only when the 
damper is open to a position to properly vent the appli- 
ance and when the power means of exhaust is in opera- 
tion. [NFPA 54:12.4.4.1] 


509.3.5 Circulating Air Ducts, Above-Ceiling Air- 
Handling Spaces, and Furnace Plenums. Venting 
systems shall not extend into or pass through any fabri- 
cated air duct or furnace plenum. [NFPA 54:12.4.5.1] 


509.3.6 Above-Ceiling or Nonducted Air Han- 
dling System. Where a venting system passes through 
an above-ceiling air space or other nonducted portion of 
an air-handling system, it shall conform to one of the fol- 
lowing requirements: 


(1) The venting system shall be a listed special gas vent, 
other system serving a Category III or Category IV 
appliance, or other positive pressure vent, with joints 
sealed in accordance with the appliance or vent man- 
ufacturer's instructions. 


(2) The vent system shall be installed such that no fit- 
tings or joints between sections are installed in the 
above-ceiling space. 

(3) The venting system shall be installed in a conduit or 
enclosure with joints between the interior of the 


enclosure and the ceiling space sealed. [NFPA 
54:12.4.5.2] 


54:12.5.2] 


TABLE 509.4 


TYPE OF VENTING SYSTEM TO BE USED 
(NFPA 54: TABLE 12.5.1) 


APPLIANCES 


TYPE OF VENTING 


LOCATION OF 


SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS 
rs Category I Type B gas vent Section 509.6 
appliances 
ii Chimney Section 509.5 


Listed appliances 
equipped with draft 
hood 


Appliances listed for 


Single-wall metal 
pipe 


Section 509.7 


Listed chimney lin- 
ing system for gas 


Section 509.5.3 


use with Type B gas venting 
vent Special gas vent 
listed for these Section 509.4.3 
appliances 
Listed veritod wali Mir Type B-W gas vent | Section 509.6 


naces 


Category II, Category 
Ш ‚апа Category IV 
appliances 


As specified or 
furnished by 
manufacturers of 
listed appliances 


Section 509.4.1 
and Section 
509.4.3 


Appliances that can be 
converted to use solid 
fuel 


Unlisted combination 
gas- and oil-burning 
appliances 
Combination gas- and 
solid fuel-burning 
appliances 


Appliances listed for 
use with chimneys only 


Unlisted appliances 


Chimney 


Section 509.5 


Listed combination 
gas- and oil-burning 
appliances 


Type L vent 


Section 509.6 


Chimney 


Section 509.5 


Decorative appliance in 
vented fireplace 


Chimney 


UMC Section 
911.2 


Gas-fired toilets 


Single-wall metal 
pipe 


Section 509.7 


Direct-vent appliances 


Section 509.2.6 


Appliances with 
integral vents 


Section 509.2.7 


509.4 Type of Venting System to be Used. The type of 
venting system to be used shall be in accordance with Table 
509.4. [NFPA 54:12.5.1] 
509.4.1 Plastic Piping. Where plastic piping is used to 
vent an appliance, the appliance shall be listed for use 
with such venting materials and the appliance manufac- 


92 


509.4.2 Plastic Vent Joints. Plastic pipe and fittings 
used to vent appliances shall be installed in accordance 
with the appliance manufacturer’s installation instruc- 
tions. Plastic pipe venting materials listed and labeled in 
accordance with UL 1738 shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the vent manufacturer’s installation instruc- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tions. Where primer is required, it shall be of a contrast- 
ing color. [NFPA 54:12.5.3] 

509.4.3 Special Gas Vents. Special gas vents shall 
be listed and labeled in accordance with UL 1738 and 


installed in accordance with the special gas vent manu- 
facturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.5.4] 


509.5 Masonry, Metal, and Factory-Built Chimneys. 
Chimneys shall be installed in accordance with Section 
509.5.1 through Section 509.5.3. 


509.5.1 Factory-Built Chimneys. Factory-built 
chimneys shall be listed in accordance with UL 103, UL 
959, or UL 2561. Factory-built chimneys used to vent 
appliances that operate at positive vent pressure shall be 
listed for such application. [NFPA 54:12.6.1.1] 


509.5.1.1 Decorative Shrouds. Decorative 
shrouds addressed in Section 509.5.4.3 shall com- 
ply with UL 103 for factory -built residential chim- 
neys. 
509.5.2 Metal Chimneys. Metal chimneys shall be 
built and installed in accordance with NFPA 211. [NFPA 
54:12.6.1.2] 


509.5.3 Masonry Chimneys. Masonry chimneys 
shall be built and installed in accordance with NFPA 211 
and lined with one of the following: 


(1) Approved clay flue lining 


(2) A chimney lining system listed and labeled in accor- 
dance with UL 1777 


(3) Other approved material that resists corrosion, ero- 
sion, softening, or cracking from vent gases at tem- 
peratures up to 1800?F (982°C) 


Exception: Masonry chimney flues lined with a chim- 
ney lining system specifically listed for use with listed 
appliances with draft hoods, Category I appliances, and 
other appliances listed for use with Type B vents shall 
be permitted. The liner shall be installed in accordance 
with the liner manufacturer's installation instructions. A 
permanent identifying label shall be attached at the point 
where the connection is to be made to the liner. The label 
shall read “This chimney liner is for appliances that burn 
gas only. Do not connect to solid or liquid fuel-burning 
appliances or incinerators.” [NFPA 54:12.6.1.3] 


509.5.4 Termination. A chimney for residential-type 
or low-heat appliances shall extend at least 3 feet (914 
mm) above the highest point where it passes through a 
roof of a building and at least 2 feet (610 mm) higher 
than any portion of a building within a horizontal dis- 
tance of 10 feet (3048 mm). [NFPA 54:12.6.2.1] (See 
Figure 509.5.4) 


509.5.4.1 Medium-Heat Gas Appliances. A 
chimney for medium-heat appliances shall extend at 
least 10 feet (3048 mm) higher than any portion of 
any building within 25 feet (7620 mm). [NFPA 
54:12.6.2.2] 

509.5.4.2 Chimney Height. A chimney shall 
extend at least 5 feet (1524 mm) above the highest 


connected appliance draft hood outlet or flue collar. 
[NFPA 54:12.6.2.3] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


509.5.4.3 Decorative Shrouds. Decorative 
shrouds shall not be installed at the termination of 
factory-built chimneys except where such shrouds 
are listed and labeled for use with the specific fac- 
tory-built chimney system and are installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer's installation 
instructions. [NFPA 54:12.6.2.4] 


509.5.5 Size of Chimneys. The effective area of a 
chimney venting system serving listed appliances with 
draft hoods, Category I appliances, and other appliances 
listed for use with Type B vents shall be in accordance 
with one of the following methods: 


(1) Those listed in Section 510.0. 


(2) The effective areas of the vent connector and chim- 
ney flue of a venting system serving a single appli- 
ance with a draft hood shall be not less than the area 
of the appliance flue collar or draft hood outlet or 
greater than seven times the draft hood outlet area. 


(3) The effective area of the chimney flue of a venting 
system serving two appliances with draft hoods shall 
be not less than the area of the larger draft hood out- 
let plus 50 percent of the area of the smaller draft 
hood outlet or greater than seven times the smaller 
draft hood outlet area. 


(4) Chimney venting systems using mechanical draft 
shall be sized in accordance with engineering meth- | 
ods. 


(5) Other engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.6.3.1] | 


509.5.6 Inspection of Chimneys. Before replacing 
an existing appliance or connecting a vent connector to 
a chimney, the chimney passageway shall be examined 
to ascertain that it is clear and free of obstructions and 
shall be cleaned if previously used for venting solid or 
liquid fuel-burning appliances or fireplaces. [NFPA 
54:12.6.4.1] 


509.5.6.1 Standard. Chimneys shall be lined in 
accordance with NFPA 211. [NFPA 54:12.6.4.2] 


509.5.6.2 Cleanouts. Cleanouts shall be exam- 
ined and where they do not remain tightly closed 
when not in use, they shall be repaired or replaced. | 
[NFPA 54:12.6.4.3] 


509.5.6.3 Existing Chimney. When inspection 
reveals that an existing chimney is not safe for the 
intended application, it shall be repaired, rebuilt, 
lined, relined, or replaced with a vent or chimney to 
conform to NFPA 211 and shall be suitable for the 
appliances to be attached. [NFPA 54:12.6.4.4] 


509.5.7 Chimney Serving Appliances Burning 
Other Fuels. An appliance shall not be connected to a 
chimney flue serving a separate appliance designed to 
burn solid fuel. [NFPA 54:12.6.5.1] 


509.5.7.1 Gas and Liquid Fuel-Burning Appli- 
ances. Where one chimney serves gas appliances 
and liquid fuel-burning appliances, the appliances 
shall be connected through separate openings or 
connected through a single opening where joined by 
a suitable fitting located as close as practical to the 


93 


WATER HEATERS 


2 feet 


10 feet 
or less \ 
mimimum а IL l 


2 feet minimum t 
3 feet 


minimum 


Wall or 

2: parapet 
Chimney | 
Chimney 


Chimney 


(a) Termination 10 feet or Less from Ridge, Wall, or Parapet 


More than 
— 10 feet 


> 


Ї 


3 feet 
minimum 


Note: No height 
above parapet 
required when 
distance from walls 
or parapet is more 
than 10 feet. 


Wall or 


parapet | Chimney 


More than 


+—— 10 feet Height above any 


«10 feet ———»| roof surface within 
10 feet horizontally 


Ridge 2 feet / 
minimum 
Z 3 feet 
minimum 


| 


/ 


Chimney 


(b) Termination More Than 10 feet from Ridge, Wall, or Parapet 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


FIGURE 509.5.4 
TYPICAL TERMINATION LOCATIONS FOR CHIMNEYS AND 


SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPES SERVING RESIDENTIAL-TYPE 


AND LOW-HEAT APPLIANCE 
[NFPA: 54: FIGURE A.12.6.2.1] 


94 


chimney. Where two or more openings are provided 
into one chimney flue, they shall be at different lev- 
els. Where the gas appliance 1s automatically con- 
trolled, it shall be equipped with a safety shutoff 
device. [NFPA 54:12.6.5.2] 


509.5.7.2 Gas and Solid Fuel-Burning Appli- 
ances. A listed combination gas- and solid-fuel- 
burning appliance connected to a single chimney 
flue shall be equipped with a manual reset device to 
shut off gas to the main burner in the event of sus- 
tained backdraft or flue gas spillage. The chimney 
flue shall be sized to properly vent the appliance. 
[NFPA 54:12.6.5.3] 


509.5.7.3 Combination Gas- and Oil-Burning 
Appliances. A single chimney flue serving a listed 
combination gas- and oil-burning appliance shall be 
sized in accordance with the appliance manufac- 
turer's instructions. [NFPA 54:12.6.5.4] 


509.5.8 Support of Chimneys. All portions of chim- 
neys shall be supported for the design and weight of the 
materials employed. Listed factory-built chimneys shall 
be supported and spaced in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.6.6] 


509.5.9 Cleanouts. Where a chimney that formerly 
carried flue products from liquid or solid fuel-burning 
appliances is used with an appliance using fuel gas, an 
accessible cleanout shall be provided. The cleanout shall 
have a tight-fitting cover and be installed so its upper 
edge is at least 6 inches (152 mm) below the lower edge 
of the lowest chimney inlet opening. [NFPA 54:12.6.7] 


509.5.10 Space Surrounding Lining or Vent. The 
remaining space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, 
special gas vent, or plastic piping installed within a 
masonry chimney shall not be used to vent another appli- 
ance. 


Exception: The insertion of another liner or vent within 
the chimney as provided in this code and the liner or vent 
manufacturer's instructions. [NFPA 54:12.6.8.1] 


509.5.10.1 Combustion Air. The remaining 
space surrounding a chimney liner, gas vent, special 
gas vent, or plastic piping installed within a 
masonry, metal, or factory-built chimney flue shall 
not be used to supply combustion air. 


Exception: Direct-vent appliances designed for 
installation in a solid fuel-burning fireplace where 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.6.8.2] 


509.6 Gas Vents. The installation of gas vents shall meet 
the following requirements: 


(1) 
Q) 


G) 


Gas vents shall be installed in accordance with the man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions. 

A Type B-W gas vent shall have a listed capacity not less 
than that of the listed vented wall furnace to which it is 
connected. 

Gas vents installed within masonry chimneys shall be 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installa- 
tion instructions. Gas vents installed within masonry 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


chimneys shall be identified with a permanent label 
installed at the point where the vent enters the chimney. 
The label shall contain the following language: “This gas 
vent is for appliances that burn gas. Do not connect to 
solid or liquid fuel-burning appliances or incinerators.” 


(4) Screws, rivets, and other fasteners shall not penetrate the 
inner wall of double-wall gas vents, except at the transi- 
tion from the appliance draft hood outlet, flue collar, or 
single-wall metal connector to a double-wall vent. 
[NFPA 54:12.7.2] 


509.6.1 Gas Vent Termination. The termination of 
gas vents shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) A gas vent shall terminate in accordance with one 
of the following: 


(a) Gas vents that are 12 inches (300 mm) or less in 
size and located not less than 8 feet (2438 mm) 
from a vertical wall or similar obstruction shall 
terminate above the roof in accordance with 
Figure 509.6.1 and Table 509.6.1. 


(b) Gas vents that are over 12 inches (300 mm) in 
size or are located less than 8 feet (2438 mm) 
from a vertical wall or similar obstruction shall 
terminate not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above 
the highest point where they pass through the 
roof and not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above 
any portion of a building within 10 feet (3048 
mm) horizontally. 


(c) Industrial appliances as provided in Section 
509.2.5. 


(d) Direct-vent systems as provided in Section 
509.2.6. 


(e) Appliances with integral vents as provided in 
Section 509.2.7. 


(f) Mechanical draft systems as provided in Sec- 
tion 509.3.3 through Section 509.3.3.4. 


(g) Ventilating hoods and exhaust systems as pro- 
vided in Section 509.3.4. 


(2) A Type B or a Type L gas vent shall terminate at 
least 5 feet (1524 mm) in vertical height above the 
highest connected appliance draft hood or flue col- 
lar. 


(3) A Type B-W gas vent shall terminate at least 12 feet 
(3658 mm) in vertical height above the bottom of 
the wall furnace. 


(4) A gas vent extending through an exterior wall shall 
not terminate adjacent to the wall or below eaves or 
parapets, except as provided in Section 509.2.6 and 
Section 509.3.3 through Section 509.3.3.4. 

(5) Decorative shrouds shall not be installed at the ter- 
mination of gas vents except where such shrouds are 
listed for use with the specific gas venting system 
and are installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. 


(6) All gas vents shall extend through the roof flashing, 
roof jack, or roof thimble and terminate with a listed 
cap or listed roof assembly. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


(7) A gas vent shall terminate at least 3 feet (914 mm) 
above a forced air inlet located within 10 feet (3048 
mm). [NFPA 54:12.7.3] 


cap 


Roof pitch is x/12 


H (minimum) — 
Minimum height from roof 
to lowest discharge opening 


FIGURE 509.6.1 
TERMINATION LOCATIONS FOR GAS 
VENTS WITH LISTED CAPS 12 INCHES OR LESS IN SIZE 
AT LEAST 8 FEET FROM A VERTICAL WALL 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 12.7.3] 


TABLE 509.6.1 
ROOF SLOPE HEIGHTS 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 12.7.3] 


ROOF SLOPE H (minimum) (feet) 

Flat to “2 1.0 
Over %2 to 712 1.25 
Over 72 to %2 1.5 
Over %I2 to %2 2.0 
Over %2 to !%2 2:5 
Over !%2 to 112 3.25 
Over !//? to бл2 4.0 
Over 912 to 112 5.0 
Over !%I2 to !%2 6.0 
Over 1%2 to 2 7.0 
Over !%I2 to 2042 7.5 
Over 2%2 to 2M2 8.0 


For SI Units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


509.6.1.1 Insulation Protection Shield. Where | 
a vent passes through an insulated assembly, an 
approved metal shield constructed of steel having a 
thickness of not less than 26 gauge (0.0179 inch) 
(0.45 mm) (No. 26 gauge) shall be installed between 
the vent and insulation. The shield shall extend not 
less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the insulation and 
be secured to the structure in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions. 


509.6.2 Size of Gas Vents. Venting systems shall be 
sized and constructed in accordance with Section 


95 


WATER HEATERS 


96 


509.6.2.1 through Section 509.6.2.3 and the appliance 
manufacturer's instructions. [NFPA 54:12.7.4] 


509.6.2.1 Category I Appliances. The sizing of 
natural draft venting systems serving one or more 
listed appliances equipped with a draft hood or 
appliances listed for use with a Type B gas vent, 
installed in a single story of a building, shall be in 
accordance with one of the following: 


(1) The provisions of Section 510.0. 


(2) Vents serving fan-assisted combustion system 
appliances, or combinations of fan-assisted 
combustion system and draft hood-equipped 
appliances, shall be sized in accordance with 
Section 510.0 or other engineering methods. 


(3 


— 


For sizing an individual gas vent for a single, 
draft hood-equipped appliance, the effective 
area of the vent connector and the gas vent shall 
be not less than the area of the appliance draft 
hood outlet or greater than seven times the draft 
hood outlet area. 


(4) For sizing a gas vent connected to two appli- 
ances with draft hoods, the effective area of the 
vent shall be not less than the area of the larger 
draft hood outlet plus 50 percent of the area of 
the smaller draft hood outlet or greater than 
seven times the smaller draft hood outlet area. 


(5) Engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.7.4.1] 


509.6.2.2 Vent Offsets. Type B and Type L vents 
sized in accordance with Section 509.6.2.1(3) or 
Section 509.6.2.1(4) shall extend in a generally ver- 
tical direction with offsets not exceeding 45 degrees 
(0.79 rad), except that a vent system having not 
more than one 60 degree (1.05 rad) offset shall be 
permitted. Any angle greater than 45 degrees (0.79 
rad) from the vertical is considered horizontal. The 
total horizontal distance of a vent plus the horizon- 
tal vent connector serving draft hood-equipped 
appliances shall not be greater than 75 percent of the 
vertical height of the vent. [NFPA 54:12.7.4.2] 


509.6.2.3 Category II, Category Ill, and Cate- 
gory IV Appliances. The sizing of gas vents for 
Category II, Category III, and Category IV appli- 
ances shall be in accordance with the appliance man- 
ufacturers’ instructions. The sizing of plastic pipe 
specified by the appliance manufacturer as a vent- 
ing material for Category II, III, and IV appliances 
shall be in accordance with the appliance manufac- 
turers’ instructions. [NFPA 54:12.7.4.3] 


509.6.2.4 Sizing. Chimney venting systems using 
mechanical draft shall be sized in accordance with 
engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.7.4.4] 


509.6.3 Gas Vents Serving Appliances on More 
than One Floor. Where a common vent is installed in 
a multistory installation to vent Category I appliances 
located on more than one floor level, the venting system 
shall be designed and installed in accordance with engi- 
neering methods. Crawl spaces, basements, and attics 
shall be considered as floor levels. [NFPA 54:12.7.5.1] 


509.6.3.1 Occupiable Space. All appliances 
connected to the common vent shall be located in 
rooms separated from occupiable space. Each of 
these rooms shall have provisions for an adequate 
supply of combustion, ventilation, and dilution air 
that is not supplied from occupiable space. [NFPA 
54:12.7.5.2] (See Figure 509.6.3.1) 


Type B gas vents 


Air grilles in 
outside walls 


Louvered door could 
be used in lieu of 
outside wall grilles 


Outside balcony 
or service area 


FIGURE 509.6.3.1 
PLAN VIEW OF PRACTICAL SEPARATION 
METHOD FOR MULTISTORY GAS VENTING 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE A.12.7.5.2] 


509.6.3.2 Multistory Venting System. The size 
of the connectors and common segments of multi- 
story venting systems for appliances listed for use 
with a Type B double-wall gas vent shall be in 
accordance with Table 510.2(1), provided all of the 
following apply: 

(1) The available total height (77) for each segment 
of a multistory venting system 1s the vertical 
distance between the level of the highest draft 
hood outlet or flue collar on that floor and the 
centerline of the next highest interconnection 
tee. 


(2) The size of the connector for a segment is deter- 
mined from the appliance's gas input rate and 
available connector rise and shall not be smaller 
than the draft hood outlet or flue collar size. 

(3) The size of the common vertical vent segment, 
and ofthe interconnection tee at the base of that 
segment, is based on the total appliance's gas 
input rate entering that segment and its avail- 
able total height. [NFPA 54:12.7.5.3] 

509.6.4 Support of Gas Vents. Gas vents shall be 
supported and spaced in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.7.6] 

509.6.5 Marking. In those localities where solid and 
liquid fuels are used extensively, gas vents shall be per- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


manently identified by a label attached to the wall or ceil- 
ing at a point where the vent connector enters the gas 
vent. The label shall read: “This gas vent is for appli- 
ances that burn gas. Do not connect to solid or liquid 
fuel-burning appliances or incinerators.” The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall determine whether its area con- 
stitutes such a locality. [NFPA 54:12.7.7] 


509.7 Single-Wall Metal Pipe. Single-wall metal pipe 
shall be constructed of galvanized sheet steel not less than 
0.0304 of an inch (0.7722 mm) thick or of other approved, 
noncombustible, corrosion-resistant material. [NFPA 
54:12.8.1] 


509.7.1 Cold Climate. Uninsulated single-wall metal 
pipe shall not be used outdoors for venting appliances in 
regions where the 99 percent winter design temperature 
is below 32°F (0°C). [NFPA 54:12.8.2] 


509.7.2 Termination. The termination of single-wall 
metal pipe shall meet the following requirements: 


(1) Single-wall metal pipe shall terminate at least 5 feet 
(1524 mm) in vertical height above the highest con- 
nected appliance draft hood outlet or flue collar. 
[NFPA 54:12.8.3(1)] 


(2) Single-wall metal pipe shall extend at least 2 feet 
(610 mm) above the highest point where it passes 
through a roof of a building and at least 2 feet (610 
mm) higher than any portion of a building within a 
horizontal distance of 10 feet (3048 mm). [NFPA 
54:12.8.3(2)] 


(3) An approved cap or roof assembly shall be attached 
to the terminus of a single-wall metal pipe. [NFPA 
54:12.8.3(3)] 

509.73 Installation with Appliances Permitted by 

Section 509.4. Single-wall metal pipe shall not be used 

as a vent in dwellings and residential occupancies. 

[NFPA 54:12.8.4.1] 
509.7.3.1 Limitations. Single-wall metal pipe 
shall be used only for runs directly from the space in 


WATER HEATERS 


which the appliance is located through the roof or 
exterior wall to the outer air. A pipe passing through 
a roof shall extend without interruption through the 
roof flashing, roof jacket, or roof thimble. [NFPA 
54:12.8.4.2] 


509.7.3.2 Attic or Concealed Space. Single- 
wall metal pipe shall not originate in any unoccu- 
pied attic or concealed space and shall not pass 
through any attic, inside wall, concealed space, or 
floor. [NFPA 54:12.8.4.3] 


509.7.3.3 Incinerator. Single-wall metal pipe used 
for venting an incinerator shall be exposed and read- 
ily examinable for its full length and shall have 
required clearances maintained. 


509.7.3.4 Clearances. Minimum clearances from 
single-wall metal pipe to combustible material shall 
be in accordance with Table 509.7.3.4(1). Reduced 
clearances from single-wall metal pipe to com- 
bustible material shall be as specified for vent con- 
nectors in Table 509.7.3.4(2). [NFPA 54:12.8.4.4] 


509.7.3.5 Combustible Exterior Wall. Single- 
wall metal pipe shall not pass through a combustible 
exterior wall unless guarded at the point of passage 
by a ventilated metal thimble not smaller than the 
following: 


(1) For listed appliances with draft hoods and appli- 
ances listed for use with Type B gas vents, the 
thimble shall be a minimum of 4 inches (100 
mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe. 
Where there is a run of not less than 6 feet 
(1829 mm) of metal pipe in the opening 
between the draft hood outlet and the thimble, 
the thimble shall be a minimum of 2 inches (50 
mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe. 


(2) For unlisted appliances having draft hoods, the 


thimble shall be a minimum of 6 inches (150 
mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe. 


TABLE 509.73.4(1) 
CLEARANCES FOR CONNECTORS 
(NFPA 54: TABLE 12.8.4.4)* 


MINIMUM DISTANCE FROM COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL (inches) 


APPLIANCE LISTED TYPE B GAS | LISTEDTYPEL VENT | SINGLE-WALL METAL FACTORY-BUILT 
VENT MATERIAL MATERIAL PIPE CHIMNEY SECTIONS 

Listed appliances with draft hoods and appli- As listed As listed 6 As listed 
ances listed for use with Type B gas vents 
Residential boilers and furnaces with listed gas : 
conversion burner and with draft hood § : 2 Asilisted 
Residential appliances listed for use with Not permitted As listed 9 As listed 
Type L vents 
Unlisted residential appliances with draft hood Not permitted 6 9 As listed 
Residential and low-heat appliances other than Not permitted 9 18 As listed 
those above 
Medium-heat appliances Not permitted Not permitted 36 As listed 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


* These clearances shall apply unless the installation instructions of a listed appliance or connector specify different clearances, in which case the listed clearances shall apply. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


97 


WATER HEATERS 


Construction using combustible 
material, plastered or unplastered ს, 


Sheet metal or 
М other protection 


<— Gas equipment 
or vent connector 


Notes: 

| A- Equals the clearance with no protection specified in Table 509.7.3.4(1) and 
Table 509.7.3.4(2) and in the sections applying to various types of equipment. 

2 Be Equals the reduced clearance permitted in accordance with Table 
509.7.3.4(2). 


? The protection applied to the construction using combustible material shall 
extend far enough in each direction to make C equal to A. 


FIGURE 509.73.4(1)^ 23 
EXTENT OF PROTECTION NECESSARY TO REDUCE CLEAR- 
ANCES FROM GAS APPLIANCE OR VENT CONNECTORS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 10.3.3.3(a)] 


Installed with side 
and top edges open 


Installed with top 
and bottom edges 
open 


Wall protector installed with 
all edges open 


Wall protector installed on 
single flat wall 


Nail or screw anchor 


Clearance 
ý reduction system 
2 1 inch noncombustible 
Spacer such as stacked washers, 
small-diameter pipe, tubing, or 


electrical conduit. 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


Note: Masonry walls shall be attached to combustible walls using wall ties. 
Spacers shall not be used directly behind appliance or connector. 


FIGURE 509.73.4(2) 
WALL PROTECTOR CLEARANCE REDUCTION SYSTEM 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 10.3.3.3(b)] 


98 


1 inch „ალ 


minimum air space 
between masonry « 
and combustible wall 


Corrugated 
metal wall 
ties 


Bottom and top course —> DN 
of bricks staggered for D 
ventilation 


A strip of heavy-gauge steel 
used for added support 


Note: Do not place masonry wall ties directly 


А : Masonry wall tie 
behind appliance or connector. 


M 
2° 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 
FIGURE 509.7.3.4(3) 
MASONRY CLEARANCE REDUCTION SYSTEM 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 10.3.3.3(c)] 


(3) For residential and low-heat appliances, the 
thimble shall be a minimum of 12 inches (300 
mm) larger in diameter than the metal pipe. 


Exception: In lieu of thimble protection, all com- 
bustible material in the wall shall be removed a suffi- 
cient distance from the metal pipe to provide the 
specified clearance from such metal pipe to com- 
bustible material. Any material used to close up such 
opening shall be noncombustible. [NFPA 54:12.8.4.6] 


509.7.3.6 Roof Thimble. Where a single-wall 
metal pipe passes through a roof constructed of com- 
bustible material, a noncombustible, nonventilating 
thimble shall be used at the point of passage. The 
thimble shall extend at least 18 inches (457 mm) 
above and 6 inches (152 mm) below the roof with 
the annular space open at the bottom and closed only 
at the top. The thimble shall be sized in accordance 
with Section 509.7.3.5. [NFPA 54:12.8.4.5] 


509.7.4 Size of Single-Wall Metal Pipe. Single-wall 
metal piping shall comply with the following require- 
ments: 


(1) A venting system ofa single-wall metal pipe shall be 
sized in accordance with one of the following meth- 
ods and the appliance manufacturer's instructions: 


(a) For a draft hood-equipped appliance, in accor- 
dance with Section 510.0. 


(b) Fora venting system for a single appliance with 
a draft hood, the areas of the connector and the 
pipe each shall not be less than the area of the 
appliance flue collar or draft hood outlet, 
whichever is smaller. The vent area shall not be 
greater than seven times the draft hood outlet 
area. 


(c) Engineering methods. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 509.7.3.4(2) 
REDUCTION OF CLEARANCES WITH SPECIFIED FORMS OF PROTECTION! 2:3; 4 5, 6, 7,8, 9, 10, 11 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 10.2.4] 


WHERE THE REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITH NO PROTECTION FROM 


TYPE OF PROTECTION APPLIED TO APPLIANCE, VENT CONNECTOR, OR SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE IS: 

AND COVERING ALL SURFACES OF 36 (inches) 18 (inches) 12 (inches) 9 (inches) 6 (inches) 
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL WITHIN ALLOWABLE CLEARANCES WITH SPECIFIED PROTECTION (inches) 

THE DISTANCE SPECIFIED AS THE USE COLUMN 1 FOR CLEARANCES ABOVE APPLIANCE OR HORIZONTAL CONNECTOR. USE COLUMN 2 
REQUIRED CLEARANCE WITH NO FOR CLEARANCES FROM APPLIANCES, VERTICAL CONNECTOR, AND SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE. 
PROTECTION [SEE FIGURE SIDES SIDES SIDES SIDES SIDES 


ABOVE AND ABOVE AND ABOVE AND ABOVE AND ABOVE AND 
SB SUCI THROUGH: FIGURE COLUMN | REAR |COLUMN | REAR |COLUMN| REAR |COLUMN| REAR |COLUMN| REAR 
509.7.3.4(3)] 1 COLUMN 1 COLUMN 1 COLUMN 1 COLUMN 1 COLUMN 
2 2 2 2 2 


(1) 3'%inch thick masonry wall 


without ventilated air space m А > 12 22 3 ლ წ > ? 


(2) ofan inch insulation board 
over 1 inch glass fiber or min- 24 18 12 9 9 6 6 5 4 3 
eral wool batts 

(3) 0.024 inch (nominal 24 gauge) 
sheet metal over 1 inch glass 
fiber or mineral wool batts 18 12 9 6 6 4 5 3 3 3 
reinforced with wire on rear 
face with ventilated air space 


(4) 3% inch thick masonry wall 


: Е : — 12 — 6 — 6 — 6 — 6 
with ventilated air space 
(5) 0.024 inch (nominal 24 gauge) 
sheet metal with ventilated air 18 12 9 6 6 4 5 3 3 2 
space 
(6) ofan inch thick insulation 18 12 9 6 6 4 5 3 3 3 


board with ventilated air space 

(7) 0.024 inch (nominal 24 gauge) 
sheet metal with ventilated air 
space over 0.024 inch (nomi- 18 12 9 6 6 4 5 3 3 3 
nal 24 gauge) sheet metal with 
ventilated air space 


(8) 1 inch glass fiber or mineral 
wool batts sandwiched 
between two sheets 0.024 inch 18 12 9 6 6 4 5 3 3 3 
(nominal 24 gauge) sheet 
metal with ventilated air space 

For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 

Notes: 

Reduction of clearances from combustible materials shall not interfere with combustion air, draft hood clearance and relief, and accessibility of servicing. 

All clearances shall be measured from the outer surface of the combustible material to the nearest point on the surface of the appliance, disregarding any inter- 


2 


vening protection applied to the combustible material. 

Spacers and ties shall be of noncombustible material. No spacer or tie shall be used directly opposite the appliance or connector. 

Where all clearance reduction systems use a ventilated air space, adequate provision for air circulation shall be provided as described. [See Figure 509.7.3.4(2) 

and Figure 509.7.3.4(3)] 

At least 1 inch (25.4 mm) shall be between clearance reduction systems and combustible walls and ceilings for reduction systems using a ventilated air space. 

Where a wall protector is installed on a single flat wall away from corners, it shall have a minimum 1 inch (25.4 mm) air gap. To provide adequate air cir- 

culation, the bottom and top edges, or only the side and top edges, or all edges shall be left open. 

Mineral wool batts (blanket or board) shall have a minimum density of 8 pounds per cubic foot (lb/ft? ) (128 kg/m? ) and a minimum melting point of 1500?F 

(816°C). 

I * Insulation material used as part of a clearance reduction system shall have a thermal conductivity of 1.0 British thermal unit inch per hour square foot degree 
Fahrenheit [Btusin/(h*ft?*°F)] [0.1 W/(m-*K)] or less. 

I ? Atleast 1 inch (25.4 mm) shall be between the appliance and the protector. The clearance between the appliance and the combustible surface shall not be 


wn > uv 


E 


reduced below that allowed in this table. 
10 All clearances and thicknesses are minimum; larger clearances and thicknesses are acceptable. 
11 Listed single-wall connectors shall be installed in accordance with the terms of their listing and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 99 


WATER HEATERS 


(2) Where a single-wall metal pipe is used and has a 
shape other than round, it shall have an equivalent 
effective area equal to the effective area of the round 
pipe for which it is substituted and the minimum 
internal dimension of the pipe shall be 2 inches (50 
mm). 

3 


— 


The vent cap or a roof assembly shall have a venting 
capacity not less than that of the pipe to which it 1s 
attached. [NFPA 54:12.8.5] 


509.75 Support of Single-Wall Metal Pipe. All 
portions of single-wall metal pipe shall be supported for 
the design and weight of the material employed. [NFPA 
54:12.8.6] 


509.7.6 Marking. Single-wall metal pipe shall comply 
with the marking provisions of Section 509.6.5. [NFPA 
54:12.8.7] 


509.8 Through-the-Wall Vent Termination. Through- 
the-wall vent termination shall be in accordance with Section 


509. 


— 
» 


» 


100 


8.1 through Section 509.8.3. 
509.8.1 Clearance for Through-the-Wall Vent Ter- 
mination. The clearance for through-the-wall direct and 


non-direct vent terminals shall be in accordance with 
Table 509.8.1 and Figure 509.8.1. 


Exception: The clearances in Table 509.8.1 shall not 
apply to the combustion air intake of a direct vent appli- 
ance. [NFPA 54:12.9.1] 


Inside 


corner detail 


Legend: 

= Vent terminal 
®) = Air supply inlet 
= Area where terminal is not permitted 


509.8.2 Annular Spaces. Where vents, including << 
those for direct-vent appliances or combustion air intake 
pipes, penetrate outside walls of buildings, the annular 
spaces around such penetrations shall be permanently 
sealed using approved materials to prevent entry of com- 
bustion products into the building. [NFPA 54:12.9.2] 


509.8.3 Vent Terminals. Vent systems for Category «4 
IV appliances that terminate through an outside wall of 

a building and discharge flue gases perpendicular to the 
adjacent wall shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 
mm) horizontally from an operable opening in an adja- 
cent building. 


Exception: This shall not apply to vent terminals that are 
2 feet (610 mm) or more above or 25 feet (7620 mm) or 
more below operable openings. [NFPA 54:12.9.3] 


509.9 Condensation Drain. Provision shall be made to 
collect and dispose of condensate from venting systems serv- 
ing Category II and Category IV appliances and noncatego- 
rized condensing appliances. [NFPA 54:12.10.1] I 


509.9.1 Installation. Drains for condensate shall be 
installed in accordance with the appliance and vent man- 
ufacturers’ installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.10.2] 


509.10 Vent Connectors for Category I Appliances. 
A vent connector shall be used to connect an appliance to a 
gas vent, chimney, or single-wall metal pipe, except where 
the gas vent, chimney, or single-wall metal pipe is directly 
connected to the appliance. [NFPA 54:12.11.1] 


FIGURE 509.8.1 
EXIT TERMINALS OF MECHANICAL DRAFT AND DIRECT-VENT VENTING SYSTEMS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 12.9.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 509.8.1 


THROUGH-THE-WALL DIRECT-VENT TERMINATION CLEARANCES 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 12.9.1] 


WATER HEATERS 


« 


MINIMUM CLEARANCES 


FIGURE MINIMUM CLEARANCES FOR 
CLEARANCE CLEARANCE LOCATION DIRECT VENT TERMINALS FOR NON-DIRECT VENT 
TERMINALS 
А Clearance above finished grade level, 12 inches 12 inches 
veranda, porch, deck, or balcony 
6 inches for appliances 
< 10 000 Btu/hr 
9 inches for appliances 
> 10 000 Btu/hr < 50 000 Btu/hr 
: : = 4 feet below or to side of 
B Clearance to window or 12 inches for appliances : 1 foot ab 
door that is openable > 50 000 Btu/hr < 150 000 Btu/hr SURE cee HORN 
opening 
Appliances 7 150 000 Btu/hr, in accordance 
with the appliance manufacturer's instructions 
and not less than the clearances specified for 
non-direct vent terminals in row B 
C Clearance to non-openable window None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer 
Vertical clearance to ventilated soffit located 
above the terminal within a horizontal : ა j 
D distance of 2 feet (610 mm) from the center None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacturer 
line of the terminal 
E Clearance to unventilated soffit None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacture 
F Clearance to outside corner of building None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacture 
G Clearance to inside corner of building None unless otherwise specified by the appliance manufacture 
Clearance to non-mechanical air supply inlet 
H to building and the combustion air inlet to Same clearance as specified for row B 
any other appliance 
I Clearance to a mechanical air supply inlet 10 feet horizontally from inlet or 3 feet above inlet 
Clearance above paved sidewalk or paved 
J driveway located on public property or other 7 feet and not located above public walkways or other areas 
areas where condensate or vapor can cause a where condensate or vapor can cause a nuisance or hazard 
nuisance or hazard 
Теш айке ашагы გნ 12 inches where the area beneath the veranda, porch, deck, or 
K balcony is open on not less than two sides. The vent terminal is 


veranda, porch, deck, or balcony 


prohibited in this location where only one side is open. 


For SI Units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW 


509.10.1 Materials. A vent connector shall be made of 
noncombustible, corrosion-resistant material capable of 
withstanding the vent gas temperature produced by the 
appliance and of sufficient thickness to withstand phys- 
ical damage. [NFPA 54:12.11.2.1] 


509.10.1.1 Unconditioned Area. Where the vent 
connector used for an appliance having a draft hood 
or a Category I appliance is located in or passes 
through an unconditioned area, attic, or crawl space, 
that portion of the vent connector shall be listed 
Type B, Type L, or listed vent material having 
equivalent insulation qualities. 


Exception: Single-wall metal pipe located within the 
exterior walls of the building and located in an uncon- 
ditioned area other than an attic or a crawl space hav- 
ing a local 99 percent winter design temperature of 
5?F (-15?C) or higher. [NFPA 54:12.11.2.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


509.10.1.2 Residential-Type Appliances. Vent 
connectors for residential-type appliances shall com- 
ply with the following: 


(1) Vent connectors for listed appliances having 
draft hoods, appliances having draft hoods and 
equipped with listed conversion burners, and 
Category I appliances that are not installed in 
attics, crawl spaces, or other unconditioned 
areas shall be one of the following: 


(a) Type B or Type L vent material. 


(b) Galvanized sheet steel not less than 0.018 
of an inch (0.457 mm) thick. 


(c) Aluminum (1100 or 3003 alloy or equiva- 
lent) sheet not less than 0.027 of an inch 
(0.686 mm) thick. 


101 


WATER HEATERS 


(d) Stainless steel sheet not less than 0.012 of 
an inch (0.305 mm) thick. 


(e) Smooth interior wall metal pipe having 
resistance to heat and corrosion equal to or 
greater than that of | Section 
509.10.1.2(1)(b), Section 509.10.1.2(1)(c), 
or Section 509.10.1.2(1)(d). 


(f) A listed vent connector. 


(2) Vent connectors shall not be covered with insu- 
lation. 


Exception: Listed insulated vent connectors shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions. [NFPA 54:12.11.2.3] 


509.10.1.3 Nonresidential Low-Heat Appli- 
ances. A vent connector for a nonresidential low- 
heat appliance shall be a factory-built chimney 
section or steel pipe having resistance to heat and 
corrosion equivalent to that for the appropriate gal- 
vanized pipe as specified in Table 509.10.1.3. Fac- 
tory-built chimney sections shall be joined together 
in accordance with the chimney manufacturer's 
instructions. [NFPA 54:12.11.2.4] 


TABLE 509.10.1.3 


MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR GALVANIZED STEEL VENT 


CONNECTORS FOR LOW-HEAT APPLIANCES 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 12.11.2.4] 


vent connector having a diameter or greatest 
cross-sectional dimension greater than 18 
inches (457 mm). 


(4) Where factory-built chimney sections are 
installed, they shall be joined together in accor- 
dance with the chimney manufacturer's instruc- 
tions. [NFPA 54:12.11.2.5] 


TABLE 509.10.1.4 


MINIMUM THICKNESS FOR STEEL VENT CONNECTORS 
FOR MEDIUM-HEAT APPLIANCES 


[NFPA 54: TABLE 12.11.2.5] 
VENT CONNECTOR SIZE 
DIAMETER AREA MINIMUM THICKNESS 
(inches) (square inches) (inches) 
Up to 14 Up to 154 0.053 
Over 14 to 16 154 to 201 0.067 
Over 16 to 18 201 to 254 0.093 
Over 18 Exceeding 254 0.123 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


509.10.2 Size of Vent Connector. A vent connector 
for an appliance with a single draft hood or for a Cate- 
gory I fan-assisted combustion system appliance shall be 
sized and installed in accordance with Section 510.0 or 
engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.1] 


509.10.2.1 Manifold. Where a single appliance hav- 
ing more than one draft hood outlet or flue collar is 
installed, the manifold shall be constructed according 
to the instructions of the appliance manufacturer. 
Where there are no instructions, the manifold shall be 
designed and constructed in accordance with engi- 


DIAMETER OF CONNECTOR MINIMUM THICKNESS 
(inches) (inches) 
Less than 6 0.019 
6 to less than 10 0.023 
10 to 12 inclusive 0.029 
14 to 16 inclusive 0.034 
Over 16 0.056 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


102 


509.10.1.4 Medium-Heat Appliances. Vent 
connectors for medium-heat appliances shall be con- 
structed of factory-built, medium-heat chimney sec- 
tions or steel of a thickness not less than that 
specified in Table 509.10.1.4 and shall comply with 
the following: 


(1) A steel vent connector for an appliance with a 
vent gas temperature in excess of 1000?F 
(538?C) measured at the entrance to the con- 
nector shall be lined with medium-duty fire 
brick or the equivalent. 

(2) The lining shall be at least 2^ inches (64 mm) 
thick for a vent connector having a diameter or 
greatest cross-sectional dimension of 18 inches 
(457 mm) or less. 


(3) The lining shall be at least 4% inches (114 mm) 
thick laid on the 4% inches (114 mm) bed for a 


neering methods. As an alternative method, the effec- 
tive area of the manifold shall equal the combined 
area of the flue collars or draft hood outlets, and the 
vent connectors shall have a minimum 1 foot (305 
mm) rise. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.2] 


509.10.2.2 Size. Where two or more appliances are 
connected to a common vent or chimney, each vent 
connector shall be sized in accordance with Section 
510.0 or engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.3] 


As an alternative method applicable only where 
all of the appliances are draft hood-equipped, each 
vent connector shall have an effective area not less 
than the area of the draft hood outlet of the appli- 
ance to which it is connected. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.4] 


509.10.2.3 Height. Where two or more appliances 
are vented through a common vent connector or vent 
manifold, the common vent connector or vent mani- 
fold shall be located at the highest level consistent with 
available headroom and clearance to combustible 
material and sized in accordance with Section 510.0 
or engineering methods. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.5] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


As an alternative method applicable only where 
there are two draft hood-equipped appliances, the 
effective area of the common vent connector or vent 
manifold and all junction fittings shall be not less 
than the area of the larger vent connector plus 50 
percent of the area of the smaller flue collar outlet. 
[NFPA 54:12.11.3.6] 


509.10.2.4 Size Increase. Where the size of a vent 
connector is increased to overcome installation limi- 
tations and obtain connector capacity equal to the 
appliance input, the size increase shall be made at the 
appliance draft hood outlet. [NFPA 54:12.11.3.7] 


509.10.3 Two or More Appliances Connected to a 
Single Vent. Where two or more openings are provided 
into one chimney flue or vent, either of the following 
shall apply: 


(1) The openings shall be at different levels. 


(2) The connectors shall be attached to the vertical por- 
tion of the chimney or vent at an angle of 45 degrees 
(0.79 rad) or less relative to the vertical. [NFPA 
54:12.11.4.1] 


509.10.3.1 Height of Connector. Where two or 
more vent connectors enter a common vent, chim- 
ney flue, or single-wall metal pipe, the smaller con- 
nector shall enter at the highest level consistent with 
the available headroom or clearance to combustible 
material. [NFPA 54:12.11.4.2] 


509.10.3.2 Pressure. Vent connectors serving 
Category I appliances shall not be connected to any 
portion of a mechanical draft system operating under 
positive static pressure, such as those serving Cate- 
gory III or Category IV appliances. [NFPA 
54:12.11.4.3] 


509.10.4 Clearance. Minimum clearances from vent 
connectors to combustible material shall be in accor- 
dance with Table 509.7.3.4(1). 


Exception: The clearance between a vent connector and 
combustible material shall be permitted to be reduced 
where the combustible material is protected as specified 
for vent connectors in Table 509.7.3.4(2). [NFPA 
54:12.11.5] 


509.10.5 Joints. Joints between sections of connector 

piping and connections to flue collars or draft hood out- 

lets shall be fastened in accordance with one of the fol- 
lowing methods: 

(1) Mechanically fastened by means of not less than 
three sheet-metal screws equally spaced around the 
joint. 

(2) Vent connectors of listed vent material assembled 
and connected to flue collars or draft hood outlets in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 

(3) Other approved means. {NFPA 54:12.11.6} 

509.10.6 Connector Junctions. Where vent connec- 

tors are joined together, the connection shall be made with 

a manufactured tee or wye fitting. [NFPA 54:12.11.7] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


509.10.7 Slope. A vent connector shall be installed << 
without any dips or sags and shall slope upward toward 
the vent or chimney at least 4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m). 


Exception: Vent connectors attached to a mechanical 
draft system installed in accordance with appliance and 
the draft system manufacturers’ instructions. [NFPA | 
54:12.11.8] 


509.10.8 Length of Vent Connector. The length of < 
vent connectors shall comply with Section 509.10.8.1 or 
Section 509.10.8.2. 


509.10.8.1 Single Wall Connector. The maximum << 
horizontal length of a single-wall connector shall be 

75 percent ofthe height of the chimney or vent, except 

for engineered systems. [NFPA 54:12.11.9.1] 


509.10.8.2 Type B Double Wall Connector. << 
The maximum horizontal length of a Type B dou- 
ble-wall connector shall be 100 percent ofthe height 

of the chimney or vent, except for engineered sys- 
tems. The maximum length of an individual con- 
nector for a chimney or vent system serving multiple 
appliances, from the appliance outlet to the junction 
with the common vent or another connector, shall 

be 100 percent of the height of the chimney or vent. 
[NFPA 54:12.11.9.2] 


509.10.9 Support. A vent connector shall be supported << 
for the design and weight of the material employed to 
maintain clearances and prevent physical damage and 
separation of joints. [NFPA 54:12.11.10] 


509.10.10 Chimney Connection. Where entering a flue < 
in a masonry or metal chimney, the vent connector shall be 
installed above the extreme bottom to avoid stoppage. 


Where a thimble or slip joint is used to facilitate 
removal of the connector, the connector shall be firmly 
attached to or inserted into the thimble or slip joint to 
prevent the connector from falling out. 


Means shall be employed to prevent the connector 
from entering so far as to restrict the space between its end 
and the opposite wall of the chimney flue. [NFPA 
54:12.11.11.1 — 12.11.11.3] 


509.10.11 Inspection. The entire length ofa vent con- << 
nector shall be readily accessible for inspection, clean- 
ing, and replacement. [NFPA 54:12.11.12] 


509.10.12 Fireplaces. A vent connector shall not be < 
connected to a chimney flue serving a fireplace unless 
the fireplace flue opening 1s permanently sealed. [NFPA 
54:12.11.13] 


509.10.13 Passage Through Ceilings, Floors, or < 
Walls. A vent connector shall not pass through a ceil- 
ing, floor, or fire-resistance-rated wall. A single-wall 
metal pipe connector shall not pass through an interior 
wall. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Vent connectors made of listed Type B or Type L 
vent material and serving listed appliances with draft 
hoods and other appliances listed for use with Type 


103 


WATER HEATERS 


B gas vents that pass through walls or partitions con- 
structed of combustible material shall be installed 
with not less than the listed clearance to combustible 
material. 


(2) Vent connectors shall be permitted to pass through 
ceilings, floors, or walls in accordance with Section 
509.7.3.1 and Section 509.7.3.5. 


» 509.10.13.1 Medium-Heat Appliances. Vent 
connectors for medium-heat appliances shall not 
pass through walls or partitions constructed of com- 
bustible material. [NFPA 54:12.11.14.2] 


509.11 Vent Connectors for Category II, Category lll, 
and Category IV Appliances. The vent connectors for 
Category II, Category III, and Category IV appliances shall be 
in accordance with Section 509.4 through Section 509.4.3. 
[NFPA 54:12.12] 


| 509.12 Appliances Requiring Draft Hoods. Vented 
appliances shall be installed with draft hoods. 


| Exception: Dual oven-type combination ranges; direct vent 
appliances; fan-assisted combustion system appliances; appli- 
ances requiring chimney draft for operation; single-firebox 
boilers equipped with conversion burners with inputs greater 
than 400 000 Btu/h (117 kW); appliances equipped with blast, 
power, or pressure burners that are not listed for use with draft 
hoods; and appliances designed for forced venting. [NFPA 
54:12.13.1] 


509.12.1 Installation. A draft hood supplied with or 
forming a part of a listed vented appliance shall be 
installed without alteration, exactly as furnished and spec- 
ified by the appliance manufacturer. [NFPA 54:12.13.2] 


If a draft hood is not supplied by the appliance man- 
ufacturer where one is required, a draft hood shall be 
installed, be of a listed or approved type, and, in the 
absence of other instructions, be of the same size as the 
appliance flue collar. Where a draft hood is required with 
a conversion burner, it shall be of a listed or approved 
type. [NFPA 54:12.13.2.1] 


509.12.2 Draft Control Devices. Where a draft con- 
trol device is part of the appliance or is supplied by the 
appliance manufacturer, it shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer’s instructions. In the 
absence of manufacturer’s instructions, the device shall 
be attached to the flue collar of the appliance or as near 
to the appliance as practical. [NFPA 54:12.13.3] 


509.12.3 Additional Devices. Appliances requiring 
controlled chimney draft shall be permitted to be 
equipped with listed double-acting barometric draft reg- 
ulators installed and adjusted in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s instructions. [NFPA 54:12.13.4] 
509.12.4 Location. Draft hoods and barometric draft 
regulators shall be installed in the same room or enclo- 
sure as the appliance in such a manner as to prevent any 
difference in pressure between the hood or regulator and 
the combustion air supply. [NFPA 54:12.13.5] 
509.12.5 Positioning. Draft hoods and draft regula- 
tors shall be installed in the position for which they were 
designed with reference to the horizontal and vertical 


104 


planes and shall be located so that the relief opening is 
not obstructed by any part of the appliance or adjacent 
construction. The appliance and its draft hood shall be 
located so that the relief opening is accessible for check- 
ing vent operation. [NFPA 54:12.13.6] 


509.12.6 Clearance. A draft hood shall be located so 
that its relief opening is not less than 6 inches (152 mm) 
from any surface except that of the appliance it serves 
and the venting system to which the draft hood is con- 
nected. Where a greater or lesser clearance is indicated 
on the appliance label, the clearance shall not be less than 
that specified on the label. Such clearances shall not be 
reduced. [NFPA 54:12.13.7] 


509.13 Manually Operated Dampers. A manually oper- 
ated damper shall not be placed in any appliance vent connec- 
tor. Fixed baffles and balancing baffles shall not be classified 
as manually operated dampers. Balancing baffles shall be 
mechanically locked in the desired position before placing the 
appliance in service. Balancing baffles shall be listed in accor- 
dance with UL 378. [NFPA 54:12.14.1 — 12.14.3] 
509.14 Automatically Operated Vent Dampers. An 
automatically operated vent damper shall be listed. [NFPA | 
54:12.15] 
509.14.1 Listing. Automatically operated vent dampers 
for oil fired appliances shall comply with UL 17. The 
automatic damper control shall comply with UL 378. 
509.15 Obstructions. Devices that retard the flow of vent 
gases shall not be installed in a vent connector, chimney, or 
vent. The following shall not be considered as obstructions: 
(1) Draft regulators and safety controls specifically listed for 
installation in venting systems and installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions. 


(2 


МУ 


Approved draft regulators and safety controls designed 
and installed in accordance with engineering methods. | 


(3 


— 


Listed heat reclaimers and automatically operated vent 
dampers installed in accordance with the manufacturers’ | 
installation instructions. 


(4 


— 


Vent dampers serving listed appliances installed in accor- 
dance with Section 510.1 or Section 510.2 or engineer- | 
ing methods. 


(5 


— 


Approved economizers, heat reclaimers, and recupera- 
tors installed in venting systems of appliances not 
required to be equipped with draft hoods, provided the 
appliance manufacturer's instructions cover the installa- 
tion of such a device in the venting system and perform- 
ance in accordance with Section 509.3 and Section 
509.3.1 1s obtained. [NFPA 54:12.16] 


510.0 Sizing of Category I Venting Systems. 


510.1 Additional Requirements to Single Appliance 
Vent. Venting Table 510.1.2(1) through Table 510.1.2(6) 
shall not be used where obstructions are installed in the vent- 
ing system. The installation of vents serving listed appliances 
with vent dampers shall be in accordance with the appliance 
manufacturer's instructions or in accordance with the fol- 
lowing: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) 
Q) 


The maximum capacity of the vent system shall be deter- 
mined using the “NAT Max” column. 


The minimum capacity shall be determined as though the 
appliance were a fan-assisted appliance, using the *FAN 
Min" column to determine the minimum capacity of the 
vent system. Where the corresponding *FAN Min" is 
“NA,” the vent configuration shall not be permitted and 
an alternative venting configuration shall be utilized. 
[NFPA 54:13.1.1] 


510.1.1 Vent Downsizing. Where the vent size deter- 
mined from the tables is smaller than the appliance draft 
hood outlet or flue collar, the use ofthe smaller size shall 
be permitted, provided that the installation complies with 
all of the following requirements: 


(1) The total vent height (А) is at least 10 feet (3048 mm). 


(2) Vents for appliance draft hood outlets or flue collars 
12 inches (300 mm) in diameter or smaller are not 
reduced more than one table size. 


(3) Vents for appliance draft hood outlets or flue collars 
larger than 12 inches (300 mm) in diameter are not 
reduced more than two table sizes. 


(4) The maximum capacity listed in the tables for a fan- 
assisted appliance is reduced by 10 percent (0.90 x 
maximum table capacity). 


(5) The draft hood outlet is greater than 4 inches (100 
mm) in diameter. A 3 inch (80 mm) diameter vent 
shall not be connected to a 4 inch (100 mm) diame- 
ter draft hood outlet. This provision shall not apply 
to fan-assisted appliances. [NFPA 54:13.1.2] 


510.1.2 Elbows. Single-appliance venting configura- 
tions with zero (0) lateral lengths in Table 510.1.2(1), 
Table 510.1.2(2), and Table 510.1.2(5) shall not have 
elbows in the venting system. Single-appliance venting 
with lateral lengths include two 90 degree (1.57 rad) 
elbows. For each additional elbow up to and including 
45 degrees (0.79 rad), the maximum capacity listed in 
the venting tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each 
additional elbow greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to 
and including 90 degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum 
capacity listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 
10 percent. Where multiple offsets occur in a vent, the 
total lateral length of all offsets combined shall not 
exceed that specified in Table 510.1.2(1) through Table 
510.1.2(5). [NFPA 54:13.1.3] 

510.1.3 Zero Lateral. Zero (0) lateral (L) shall apply 


only to a straight vertical vent attached to a top outlet 
draft hood or flue collar. [NFPA 54:13.1.4] 


510.1.4 High-Altitude Installations. Sea level input 
ratings shall be used when determining maximum capac- 
ity for high-altitude installation. Actual input (derated for 
altitude) shall be used for determining minimum capac- 
ity for high-altitude installation. [NFPA 54:13.1.5] 

510.1.5 Multiple Input Ratings. For appliances with 
more than one input rate, the minimum vent capacity 
(FAN Min) determined from Table 510.1.2(1) through 
Table 510.2(9) shall be less than the lowest appliance input 
rating, and the maximum vent capacity (FAN Max/NAT 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


Max) determined from the tables shall be greater than the 
highest appliance rating input. [NFPA 54:13.1.6] 


510.1.6 Corrugated Chimney Liners. Listed corru- 
gated metallic chimney liner systems in masonry chim- 
neys shall be sized by using Table 510.1.2(1) or Table 
510.1.2(2) for Type B vents with the maximum capacity 
reduced by 20 percent (0.80 x maximum capacity) and 
the minimum capacity as shown in Table 510.1.2(1) or 
Table 510.1.2(2). 


Corrugated metallic liner systems installed with 
bends or offsets shall have their maximum capacity fur- 
ther reduced in accordance with Section 510.1.2. The 20 
percent reduction for corrugated metallic chimney liner 
systems includes an allowance for one long radius 90 
degree (1.57 rad) turn at the bottom of the liner. [NFPA 
54:13.1.7] 


510.1.7 Connection to Chimney Liners. Connec- 
tions between chimney liners and listed double-wall con- 
nectors shall be made with listed adapters designed for 
such purpose. [NFPA 54:13.1.8] 


510.1.8 Vertical Vent Upsizing Using the 7 Times | 
Rule. Where the vertical vent has a larger diameter than 
the vent connector, the vertical vent diameter shall be 
used to determine the minimum vent capacity, and the 
connector diameter shall be used to determine the maxi- 
mum vent capacity. The flow area of the vertical vent 
shall not exceed seven times the flow area of the listed 
appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft 
hood outlet area unless designed in accordance with 
engineering methods. [NFPA 54:13.1.9] I 


510.1.9 Draft Hood Conversion Accessories. Draft 
hood conversion accessories for use with masonry chim- 
neys venting listed Category I fan-assisted appliances 
shall be listed and installed in accordance with the listed 
accessory manufacturer's installation instructions. 
[NFPA 54:13.1.10] 


510.1.10 Chimney and Vent Locations. Table 
510.1.2(1) through Table 510.1.2(5) shall be used only 
for chimneys and vents not exposed to the outdoors 
below the roof line. A Type B vent or listed chimney lin- 
ing system passing through an unused masonry chimney 
flue shall not be considered to be exposed to the out- 
doors. Where vents extend outdoors above the roof more 
than 5 feet (1524 mm) higher than required by Table 
509.6.1, and where vents terminate in accordance with 
Section 509.6.1(1)(b), the outdoor portion of the vent 
shall be enclosed as required by this paragraph for vents 
not considered to be exposed to the outdoors, or such 
venting system shall be engineered. A Type B vent pass- 
ing through an unventilated enclosure or chase insulated 
to a value of not less than R-8 shall not be considered to 
be exposed to the outdoors. Table 510.1.2(3) in combi- 
nation with Table 510.1.2(6) shall be used for claytile- 
lined exterior masonry chimneys, provided all of the 
following requirements are met: 


(1) The vent connector is Type B double wall. 


(2) The vent connector length is limited to 18 inches per 
inch (18 mm/mm) of vent connector diameter. 


105 


WATER HEATERS 


(3) The appliance is draft hood equipped. 


(4) The input rating is less than the maximum capacity 
given in Table 510.1.2(3). 


(5) For a water heater, the outdoor design temperature 
shall not be less than 5?F (-15?C). 

(6) For a space-heating appliance, the input rating is 
greater than the minimum capacity given by Table 
510.1.2(6). [NFPA 54:13.1.11] 


510.1.11 Corrugated Vent Connector Size. Corru- 
gated vent connectors shall not be smaller than the listed 
appliance categorized vent diameter, flue collar diameter, 
or draft hood outlet diameter. [NFPA 54:13.1.12] 


510.1.12 Upsizing. Vent connectors shall not be 
upsized more than two sizes greater than the listed appli- 
ance categorized vent diameter, flue collar diameter, or 
draft hood outlet diameter. [NFPA 54:13.1.13] 


510.1.13 Multiple Vertical Vent Sizes. In a single run 
of vent or vent connector, more than one diameter and 
type shall be permitted to be used, provided that all the 
sizes and types are permitted by the tables. [NFPA 
54:13.1.14] 


510.1.14 Interpolation. Interpolation shall be permit- 
ted in calculating capacities for vent dimensions that fall 
between table entries. [NFPA 54:13.1.15] 


510.1.15 Extrapolation. Extrapolation beyond the 
table entries shall not be permitted. [NFPA 54:13.1.16] 


510.1.16 Sizing Vents Not Covered by Tables. 
Where a vent height is lower than 6 feet (1829 mm) or 
higher than shown in Table 510.1.2(1) through Table 
510.2(9), an engineering method shall be used to calcu- 
late the vent capacity. [NFPA 54:13.1.17] 

510.1.17 Height Entries. Where the actual height of a 
vent falls between entries in the height column of the 
applicable table in Table 510.1.2(1) through Table 
510.1.2(6), either of the following shall be used: 


(1) Interpolation. 


(2) The lower appliance input rating shown in the table 
entries for FAN Max and NAT Max column values; 
and the higher appliance input rating for the FAN 
Min column values. [NFPA 54:13.1.18] 


510.2 Additional Requirements to Multiple-Appliance 
Vent. Venting Table 510.2(1) through Table 510.2(9) shall not 
be used where obstructions are installed in the venting system. 
The installation of vents serving listed appliances with vent 
dampers shall be in accordance with the appliance manufac- 
turer's instructions, or in accordance with the following: 


(1) 
Q) 


(3) 


106 


The maximum capacity of the vent connector shall be 
determined using the NAT Max column. 


The maximum capacity of the vertical vent or chimney 
shall be determined using the FAN + NAT column when 
the second appliance is a fan-assisted appliance, or the 
NAT + NAT column when the second appliance is 
equipped with a draft hood. 


The minimum capacity shall be determined as if the 
appliance were a fan-assisted appliance, as follows: 


(a) The minimum capacity of the vent connector shall 
be determined using the FAN Min column. 


(b) The FAN + FAN column shall be used when the 
second appliance is a fan-assisted appliance, and the 
FAN + NAT column shall be used when the second 
appliance is equipped with a draft hood, to deter- 
mine whether the vertical vent or chimney configu- 
ration is not permitted (NA). Where the vent 
configuration is NA, the vent configuration shall not 
be permitted and an alternative venting configura- 
tion shall be utilized. [NFPA 54:13.2.1] 


510.2.1 Vent Connector Maximum Length. The 
maximum vent connector horizontal length shall be 18 
inches per inch (18 mm/mm) of connector diameter as 
shown in Table 510.2.1, or as permitted by Section 
510.2.2. [NFPA 54:13.2.2] 


TABLE 510.2.1 
VENT CONNECTOR MAXIMUM LENGTH 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2.2] 


CONNECTOR DIAMETER ORDENA ГЕНА: 

(inches) (feet) 
3 4% 
4 6 
5 7% 
6 9 
7 10% 
8 12 
9 13% 
10 15 
12 18 
14 21 
16 24 
18 27 
20 30 
22 33 
24 36 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


510.2.2 Vent Connector Exceeding Maximum 
Length. The vent connector shall be routed to the vent 
utilizing the shortest possible route. Connectors with 
longer horizontal lengths than those listed in Table 
510.2.1 are permitted under the following conditions: 


(1) The maximum capacity (FAN Max or NAT Max) of 
the vent connector shall be reduced 10 percent for 
each additional multiple of the length listed in Table 
510.2.1. For example, the maximum length listed for 
a 4 inch (100 mm) connector is 6 feet (1829 mm). 
With a connector length greater than 6 feet (1829 
mm) but not exceeding 12 feet (3658 mm), the max- 
imum capacity must be reduced by 10 percent (0.90 
x maximum vent connector capacity). With a con- 
nector length greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) but not 
exceeding 18 feet (5486 mm), the maximum capac- 
ity shall be reduced by 20 percent (0.80 x maximum 
vent capacity). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(2) Fora connector serving a fan-assisted appliance, the 
minimum capacity (FAN Min) of the connector shall 
be determined by referring to the corresponding sin- 
gle appliance table. For Type B double-wall con- 
nectors, Table 510.1.2(1) shall be used. For 
single-wall connectors, Table 510.1.2(2) shall be 
used. The height (Н) and lateral (L) shall be meas- 
ured according to the procedures for a single appli- 
ance vent, as if the other appliances were not 
present. [NFPA 54:13.2.3] 


510.2.3 Vent Connector Manifolds. Where the vent 
connectors are combined prior to entering the vertical 
portion of the common vent to form a common vent man- 
ifold, the size of the common vent manifold and the com- 
mon vent shall be determined by applying a 10 percent 
reduction (0.90 x maximum common vent capacity) to 
the common vent capacity part of the common vent 
tables. The length of the common vent manifold (LM) 
shall not exceed 18 inches per inch (18 mm/mm) of com- 
mon vent diameter (D). [NFPA 54:13.2.4] 


510.2.4 Vent Offsets. Where the common vertical vent 
is offset, the maximum capacity of the common vent 
shall be reduced in accordance with Section 510.2.5, and 
the horizontal length of the common vent offset shall not 
exceed 18 inches per inch (18 mm/mm) of common vent 
diameter (D). Where multiple offsets occur in a common 
vent, the total horizontal length of all offsets combined 
shall not exceed 18 inches per inch (18 mm/mm) of the 
common vent diameter. [NFPA 54:13.2.5] 


510.2.5 Elbows in Vents. For each elbow up to and 
including 45 degrees (0.79 rad) in the common vent, the 
maximum common vent capacity listed in the venting 
tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each elbow 
greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to and including 90 
degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum common vent capacity 
listed in the venting tables shall be reduced by 10 per- 
cent. [NFPA 54:13.2.6] 


510.2.6 Elbows in Connectors. The vent connector 
capacities listed in the common vent sizing tables include 
allowance for two 90 degree (1.57 rad) elbows. For each 
additional elbow up to and including 45 degrees (0.79 
rad), the maximum vent connector capacity listed in the 
venting tables shall be reduced by 5 percent. For each 
elbow greater than 45 degrees (0.79 rad) up to and 
including 90 degrees (1.57 rad), the maximum vent con- 
nector capacity listed in the venting tables shall be 
reduced by 10 percent. [NFPA 54:13.2.7] 


510.2.7 Common Vent Minimum Size. The cross- 
sectional area of the common vent shall be equal to or 
greater than the cross-sectional area of the largest con- 
nector. [NFPA 54:13.2.8] 


510.2.8 Tee and Wye Fittings. Tee and wye fittings 
connected to a common gas vent shall be considered as 
part of the common gas vent and constructed of materi- 
als consistent with that of the common gas vent. [NFPA 
54:13.2.9] 


510.2.9 Size of Fittings. At the point where tee or wye 
fittings connect to a common gas vent, the opening size 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


of the fitting shall be equal to the size of the common 
vent. Such fittings shall not be prohibited from having 
reduced size openings at the point of connection of appli- 
ance gas vent connectors. [NFPA 54:13.2.10] 


510.2.10 High-Altitude Installations. Sea level input 
ratings shall be used when determining maximum capac- 
ity for high-altitude installation. Actual input (derated for 
altitude) shall be used for determining minimum capac- 
ity for high-altitude installation. [NFPA 54:13.2.11] 


510.2.11 Vent Connector Rise. The vent connector 
rise (R) for each appliance shall be measured from the 
draft hood outlet or flue collar to the centerline where the 
vent gas streams come together. {NFPA 54:13.2.12} 


510.2.12 Vent Height. The available total height (Н) 
for multiple appliances on the same floor shall be meas- 
ured from the highest draft hood outlet or flue collar up 
to the level of the outlet of the common vent. [NFPA 
54:13.2.13] 


510.2.13 Multistory Vent Height. Where appliances | 
are located on more than one floor, the available total 
height (Н) for each segment of the system shall be the 
vertical distance between the highest draft hood outlet or 
flue collar entering that segment and the centerline of the 
next higher interconnection tee. [NFPA 54:13.2.14] 


510.2.14 Size of Vents for Multistory Installa- 
tions. The size ofthe lowest connector and of the verti- 
cal vent leading to the lowest interconnection of a 
multistory system shall be in accordance with Table 
510.1.2(1) or Table 510.1.2(2) for available total height 
(H) up to the lowest interconnection. [NFPA 54:13.2.15] 


510.2.15 Multistory Type B Vents Required. Where | 
used in multistory systems, vertical common vents shall 
be Type B double wall and shall be installed with a listed 
vent cap. [NFPA 54:13.2.16] 

510.2.16 Multistory Vent Offsets and Capacity. | 

Offsets in multistory common vent systems shall be lim- 

Ited to a single offset in each system, and systems with an 

offset shall comply with all of the following: 

(1) The offset angle shall not exceed 45 degrees (0.79 
rad) from vertical. 

(2) The horizontal length of the offset shall not exceed 
18 inches per inch (18 mm/mm) of common vent 
diameter of the segment in which the offset is 
located. 


(3) For the segment of the common vertical vent con- 
taining the offset, the common vent capacity listed in 
the common venting tables shall be reduced by 20 
percent (0.80 x maximum common vent capacity). 


(4) A multistory common vent shall not be reduced in 
size above the offset. [NFPA 54:13.2.17] 


510.2.17 Vertical Vent Size Limitation. Where two 
or more appliances are connected to a vertical vent or 
chimney, the flow area of the largest section of vertical 
vent or chimney shall not exceed seven times the small- 
est listed appliance categorized vent areas, flue collar 
area, or draft hood outlet area unless designed in accor- 
dance with engineering methods. [NFPA 54:13.2.18] | 


107 


WATER HEATERS 


108 


510.2.18 Two-Stage/Modulating Appliances. The 
minimum vent connector capacity (FAN Min) of appli- 
ances with more than one input rate shall be determined 
from the tables and shall be less than the lowest appli- 
ance input rating. The maximum vent connector capacity 
(FAN Max or NAT Max) shall be determined from the 
tables and shall be greater than the highest appliance 
input rating. [NFPA 54:13.2.19] 


510.2.19 Corrugated Metallic Chimney Liner 
Reduction. Listed corrugated metallic chimney liner 
systems in masonry chimneys shall be sized by using 
Table 510.2(1) or Table 510.2(2) for Type B vents, with 
the maximum capacity reduced by 20 percent (0.80 x 
maximum capacity) and the minimum capacity as shown 
in Table 510.2(1) or Table 510.2(2). Corrugated metallic 
liner systems installed with bends or offsets shall have 
their maximum capacity further reduced in accordance 
with Section 510.2.4 and Section 510.2.5. The 20 per- 
cent reduction for corrugated metallic chimney liner sys- 
tems includes an allowance for one long radius 90 degree 
(1.57 rad) turn at the bottom of the liner. [NFPA 
54:13.2.20] 


510.2.20 Chimneys and Vents. Table 510.2(1) 
through Table 510.2(5) shall be used only for chimneys 
and vents not exposed to the outdoors below the roof 
line. A Type B vent or listed chimney lining system pass- 
ing through an unused masonry chimney flue shall not 
be considered to be exposed to the outdoors. A Type B 
vent passing through an unventilated enclosure or chase 
insulated to a value of not less than R8 shall not be con- 
sidered to be exposed to the outdoors. Where vents 
extend outdoors above the roof more than 5 feet (1524 
mm) higher than required by Table 509.6.1, and where 
vents terminate in accordance with Section 509.6.1(1)(b), 
the outdoor portion of the vent shall be enclosed as 
required by this section for vents not considered to be 
exposed to the outdoors, or such venting system shall be 
engineered. Table 510.2(6) through Table 510.2(9) shall 
be used for clay tile lined exterior masonry chimneys, 
provided all the following conditions are met: 


(1) The vent connector is Type B double wall. 
(2) At least one appliance is draft hood equipped. 


(3) The combined appliance input rating is less than the 
maximum capacity given by Table 510.2(6) (for 
NAT + NAT) or Table 510.2(8) (for FAN + NAT). 


The input rating of each space-heating appliance is 
greater than the minimum input rating given by 
Table 510.2(7) (for NAT + NAT) or Table 510.2(9) 
(for FAN * NAT). 


(5) The vent connector sizing is in accordance with 
Table 510.2(3). [NFPA 54:13.2.22] 


510.2.21 Vent Connector Sizing. Vent connectors 
shall not be increased more than two sizes greater than 
the listed appliance categorized vent diameter, flue col- 
lar diameter, or draft hood outlet diameter. Vent con- 
nectors for draft hood-equipped appliances shall not be 
smaller than the draft hood outlet diameter. Where a vent 
connector size(s) determined from the tables for a fan- 


(4 


— 


assisted appliance(s) is smaller than the flue collar diam- 
eter, the use of the smaller size(s) shall be permitted, pro- 
vided that the installation complies with all of the 
following conditions: 


(1) Vent connectors for fan-assisted appliance flue col- 
lars 12 inches (300 mm) in diameter or smaller are 
not reduced by more than one table size [e.g., 12 
inches to 10 inches (300 mm to 250 mm) is a one- 
size reduction], and those larger than 12 inches (300 
mm) in diameter are not reduced more than two 
table sizes [e.g., 24 inches to 20 inches (600 mm to 
500 mm) is a two-size reduction]. 


(2) The fan-assisted appliance(s) is common vented 
with a draft hood-equipped appliance(s). 


(3) The vent connector has a smooth interior wall. 
[NFPA 54:13.2.24] 


510.2.22 Combination of Pipe Types and Sizes. 
All combinations of pipe sizes, single-wall metal pipe, 
and double-wall metal pipe shall be allowed within any 
connector run(s) or within the common vent, provided 
ALL of the appropriate tables permit ALL of the desired 
sizes and types of pipe, as if they were used for the entire 
length of the subject connector or vent. Where single- 
wall and Type B double-wall metal pipes are used for 
vent connectors within the same venting system, the 
common vent shall be sized using Table 510.2(2) or 
Table 510.2(4) as appropriate. [NFPA 54:13.2.25] 


510.2.23 Multiple Connector and Vent Sizes. 
Where Table 510.2(1) through Table 510.2(9) permits 
more than one diameter of pipe to be used for a connec- 
tor or vent, all the permitted sizes shall be permitted to be 
used. [NFPA 54:13.2.26] 


510.2.24 Interpolation. Interpolation shall be permit- 
ted in calculating capacities for vent dimensions that fall 
between table entries. [NFPA 54:13.2.27] 

510.2.25 Extrapolation. Extrapolation beyond the 

table entries shall not be permitted. [NFPA 54:13.2.28] 

510.2.26 Engineering Methods. For vent heights 

lower than 6 feet (1829 mm) and higher than shown in 

the tables, engineering methods shall be used to calcu- 
late vent capacities. [NFPA 54:13.2.29] 

510.2.27 Height Entries. Where the actual height of a 

vent falls between entries in the height column of the 

applicable table in Table 510.2(1) through Table 

510.2(9), either of the following shall be used: 

(1) Interpolation. 

(2) The lower appliance input rating shown in the table 
entries, for FAN Max and NAT Max column val- 
ues; and the higher appliance input rating for the 
FAN Min column values. [NFPA 54:13.2.30] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


99% Winter Design Temperatures for the Contiguous United States 
This map is a necessarily generalized guide to temperatures in the contiguous United States. Temperatures shown for areas such 


as mountainous regions and large urban centers are not necessarily accurate. The climate data used to develop this map are from 
the ASHRAE Handbook — Fundamentals (Climate Conditions for the United States). 


For 9994 winter design temperatures in Alaska, consult the ASHRAE Handbook — Fundamentals. 
99% winter design temperatures for Hawaii are greater than 37°F 
For SI units: °C = (°F-32)/1.8 


FIGURE 510.1.10 


RANGE OF WINTER DESIGN TEMPERATURES USED IN ANALYZING EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEYS IN THE UNITED STATES 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.2.4] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 109 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(a)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | CONNECTED DIRECTLY TO VENT 


VENT DIAMETER ~ D (inch) 


3 4 5 6 7 


APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 


HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 


6 0 0 78 46 0 12 86 0 | 251 IM о | 375 205 o | 524 285 
2 13 5 232 18 | 97 67 27 | 157 105 | 32 oo 157 | 44 | 321 217 
4 21 | 49 | 34 | 30 | 94 | 64 | 39 | 153 | 103 | 50 | 227 | 153 | 66 | 316 211 
6 25 | 46 32 | 36 о 6l | 47 | 149 100 so | 223 149 | 78 | 310 205 
8 0 0 84 | 50 0 | 165 94 0 | 276 | 155 | 0 | 415 235 0 | 583 220 
2 12 | 57 40 | 16 | 100 75 | 25 | 178 120 | 28 | 263 180 42 | 365 247 
5 23 | 53 | 38 | 32 | 103 | 71 | 42 | 171 | 115 | o | 255 | 173 | 70 | 356 237 
8 28 | 49 35 | 39 | 98 66 | 51 | 164 109 | 64 | 247 165| 84 | 347 227 
10 0 0 88 53 0 | 175 I00 o | 295 16 o | 447 255 | o | ol 345 
2 12 | 66 42 | 17 | 118 81 | 23 | 194 129 | 26 | 289 195 | 40 | 402 273 
5 23 | 57 40 | 32 | 113 77 | 41 | 187 124 | 52 | 280 188 | 68 | 392 263 
10 30 | 581 | 36 | 41 | 104 70 | 54 | 176 115 | 67 | 267 | 175 | 88 | 376 | 245 
15 0 0 94 | 58 0 | 191 I2 o 27 1877 o 502 28 o | 716 390 
2 11 | 69 | 48 | 15 | 136 | 93 | 20 | 226 150 | 22 | 339 | 225 | 38 | 475 | 316 
5 22 | 65 45 | 30 | 130 87 | 39 | 219 | 142 | 49 | 330 | 217 | 64 | 463 | 300 
10 29 | 59 4 | 40 | 121 82 | 51 | 206 135 | 64 | 315 208 | 84 | 445 288 
15 35 | 53 37 | 48 | 112 76 | 61 | 195 128 | 76 | 301 198 98 | 429 275 
20 0 0 97 61 0 |20 119| о |349 20 | о | 540 307 | 0 | 776 | 430 
2 10 | 75 51 14 | 149 100 | 18 | 250 | 166 | 20 | 377 249 | 33 | 531 | 346 
5 21 | 71 48 | 29 | 143 96 | 38 | 240 160 47 | 367 241 | o | 519 337 
10 23 | 64 44 38 | 133 89 | 50 | 229 150 62 | 351 228 | 31 M 321 
15 34 5 40 | 46 | 124 8 | 59 | 217 142 73 | 337 217 94 | 481 308 
20 48 | 52 35 | 55 | M6 78 | 69 | 206 134 | 84 | 322 206 | 107 | 464 295 


30 0 0 100 64 0 213 128 0 374 | 220 0 587 | 336 0 853 475 


2 9 81 | 56 | 13 | 166 | 112 14 | 283 | 185 | 18 | 432 | 280 | 27 | 613 394 
5 21 | 77 54 28 | 160 | 108 | 36 | 275 | 176 | 45 | 421 | 273 | 58 | 600 | 385 
10 27 | 70 50 | 37 | 150 102 | 48 | 262 171 | 59 | 405 261 | 77 | 580 371 
15 33 | 64 | NA | 44 | 141 | 96 | 57 | 249 163 | 70 | 389 249 | 90 | 560 | 357 
20 56 | 58 | NA | 53 | 132 90 | 66 | 237 154 | 80 | 374 | 237 | 102 | 542 | 343 
30 NA | МА NA | 73 | 113 | NA | 88 | 214 | NA | 104 | 346 | 219 | 131 | 507 321 
50 0 0 | 101 BE 0 | 216 134 о | 397 232 0 оз 36 o |o» 518 
2 8 86 61 11 | 183 122 | 14 | 320 | 206 | 15 | 497 | 314 | 22 | 715 | 445 
5 20 | 82 МА 27 | 177 119 | 35 | 312 200 43 | 497 308 | o | 702 438 
10 26 | 76 | NA | 35 | 168 114 45 | 299 | 190 | 56 | 471 | 2988 | 73 | 681 | 426 
15 59 | 70 | NA | 42 | 158 NA | 54 | 287 180 | 66 | 455 | 288 | 85 | 662 | 413 
20 NA | МА NA | 50 | 149 NA | 63 | 275 169 76 | 440 | 278 | 97 | 642 | 401 
30 NA | МА NA | 69 | 131 | NA | 84 | 250 | NA | 99 | 410 | 259 123 | 605 | 376 
100 0 NA | NA NA о |218 МА о 47 МА о |665 400 0 | 997 | 560 
2 NA | МА NA | 10 | 194 | NA | 12 | 354 | NA | 13 | 566 375 | 18 | 831 510 
5 NA | МА NA | 26 | 189 | NA | 33 | 347 | NA | 40 | 557 369 | 52 | 820 504 
10 NA | МА NA | 33 | 182 | NA | 43 | 335 | NA | 53 | 542 | 361 | 68 | 801 493 
15 NA | МА NA | 40 | 174 | NA | 50 | 321 | NA | 62 | 528 | 353 | 80 | 782 482 
20 NA | МА NA | 47 | 166 | NA | 59 | 311 | NA | 71 | 513 | 344 | 90 | 765. 471 
30 NA | МА NA | NA | NA | NA | 78 | 290 | NA | 92 | 483 | NA | 115 | 726 | 449 
50 NA | МА NA | NA | МА МА | NA | МА NA | 147 | 428 | NA | 180 | 651 405 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


110 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(a)] (continued) 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | CONNECTED DIRECTLY TO VENT 
VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 12 14 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 

H L — ი.ი — 47 77, 7 — 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 0 0 698 370 0 897 470 0 1121 570 0 1645 850 0 2267 1170 
2 53 425 285 63 543 370 75 675 455 103 982 650 138 | 1346 890 
4 79 419 279 93 536 362 110 668 445 147 975 640 191 1338 880 
6 93 413 273 110 530 354 128 661 435 171 967 630 219 | 1330 870 
8 0 0 780 415 0 1006 537 0 1261 660 0 1858 | 970 0 2571 | 1320 
2 50 483 322 60 619 418 71 770 515 98 1124 | 745 130 | 1543 1020 
5 83 473 313 99 607 407 115 758 503 154 | 1110 733 199 | 1528 | 1010 
8 99 463 303 117 596 396 137 746 490 180 | 1007 720 231 1514 | 1000 
10 0 0 847 450 0 1096 585 0 1377 720 0 2036 | 1060 0 2825 1450 
2 48 533 355 57 684 457 68 852 560 93 1244 850 124 | 1713 1130 
5 81 522 346 95 671 446 112 839 547 149 | 1220 829 192 | 1696 1105 
10 104 504 330 122 651 427 142 817 325 187 | 1204 795 238 | 1669 | 1080 
15 0 0 970 525) 0 1263 682 0 1596 840 0 2380 1240 0 3323 1720 
2 45 633 414 53 815 544 63 1019 675 86 1495 985 114 | 2062 1350 
5 76 620 403 90 800 529 105 1003 660 140 | 1476 967 182 | 2041 1327 
10 99 600 386 116 777 507 135 977 635 177 | 1446 936 227 | 2009 | 1289 
15 115 580 373 134 755 491 155 953 610 202 | 1418 905 257 | 1976 | 1250 
20 0 0 1057 575 0 1384 752 0 1756 930 0 2637 | 1350 0 3701 | 1900 
2 41 711 470 50 917 612 59 1150 755 81 1694 1100 | 107 | 2343 1520 
5 73 697 460 86 902 599 101 1133 738 135 | 1674 1079 | 174 | 2320 | 1498 
10 95 675 443 112 877 576 130 | 1105 710 172 | 1641 1045 | 220 | 2282 1460 
15 111 654 427 129 853 55 150 | 1078 688 195 | 1609 1018 | 248 | 2245 1425 
20 125 634 410 145 830 537 167 | 1052 665 217 | 1578 990 273 | 2210 1390 
30 0 0 1173 | 650 0 1548 | 855 0 1977 | 1060 0 3004 | 1550 0 4252 | 2170 
2 33 826 535 42 1072 700 54 1351 865 74 2004 1310 98 2786 | 1800 
5 69 811 524 82 1055 688 96 1332 851 127 | 1981 1289 | 164 | 2759 1775 
10 91 788 507 107 |1028 668 125 1301 829 164 | 1944 1254 | 209 | 2716 1733 
15 105 765 490 124 | 1002 648 143 1272 807 187 | 1908 1220 | 237 | 2674 1692 
20 119 743 473 139 977 628 160 | 1243 784 207 | 1873 1185 | 260 | 2633 1650 
30 149 702 444 171 929 594 195 1189 745 246 | 1807 1130 | 305 | 2555 1585 
50 0 0 1297 | 708 0 1730 952 0 2231 1195 0 344] 1825 0 4934 | 2550 
2 26 975 615 33 1276 813 41 1620 | 1010 66 2431 | 1513 86 34090 2125 
5 65 960 605 TT 1259 798 90 1600 996 118 | 2406 1495 151 | 3380 | 2102 
10 86 935 589 101 | 1230 773 118 | 1567 972 154 | 2366 1466 | 196 | 3332 2064 
15 100 911 572» 117 | 1203 747 136 | 1536 948 177 | 2327 1437 | 222 | 3285 2026 
20 113 888 556 131 | 1176 722 151 1505 924 195 | 2288 1408 | 244 | 3239 1987 
30 141 844 522 161 | 1125 670 183 1446 876 232 | 2214 1349 | 287 | 3150 1910 
100 0 0 1411 770 0 1908 1040 0 2491 1310 0 3925 | 2050 0 5729 | 2950 
2 21 1155 | 700 25 1536 935 30 1975 | 1170 44 3027 | 1820 72 4313 | 2550 
5 60 1141 | 692 71 1519 926 82 1955 1159 | 107 | 3002 1803 136 | 4282 2531 
10 80 1118 | 679 94 1492 910 108 | 1923 1142 | 142 | 2961 1775 180 | 4231 | 2500 
15 93 10905 | 666 109 | 1465 895 126 | 1892 1124 | 163 | 2920 1747 | 206 | 4182 2469 
20 105 | 1073 | 653 122 | 1438 880 141 1861 1107 | 181 | 2880 1719 | 226 | 4133 2438 
30 131 | 1029 627 149 | 1387 | 849 170 | 1802 1071 | 215 | 2803 1663 | 265 | 4037 | 2375 
50 197 944 375) 217 | 1288 787 | 241 1688 | 1000 | 292 | 2657 1550 | 350 | 3856 | 2250 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 111 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(a)] (continued) 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: 


SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: 


CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: 


CONNECTED DIRECTLY TO VENT 


VENT DIAMETER – D (inch) 


16 


18 


20 


22 24 


APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 


HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
un ica Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 0 0 2983 1530 0 3802 1960} 0 4721 2430 0 5737 | 2950 0 6853 3520 
2 178 | 1769 1170 | 225 | 2250 1480 | 296 | 2782 1850 | 360 3377 2220 | 426 | 4030 2670 
4 242 | 1761 1160 | 300 | 2242 1475 | 390 | 2774 1835 | 469 | 3370 2215 | 555 | 4023 2660 
6 276 | 1753 1150 | 341 | 2235 1470 | 437 | 2767 1820 | 523 | 3363 2210 | 618 | 4017 2650 
8 0 0 3399 1740 0 4333 2220 0 5387 2750 0 6555 | 3360 0 7838 4010 
2 168 | 2030 1340 | 212 | 2584 1700 | 278 | 3196 2110 | 336 | 3882 2560 | 401 | 4634 3050 
5 251 | 2013 1330) 311 | 2563 1685 | 398 | 3180 2090 | 476 | 3863 2545 | 562 | 4612 3040 
8 289 | 2000 1320 | 354 | 2552 1670 | 450 | 3163 | 2070 | 537 | 3850 2530 | 630 | 4602 3030 
10 0 0 3742 | 1925 0 4782 2450 0 5955 3050 0 7254 3710 0 8682 4450 
2 161 | 2256 1480 | 202 | 2868 1890 | 264 | 3556 2340 | 319 | 4322 2840 | 378 | 5153 3390 
5 243 | 2238 1461 | 300 | 2849 1871 | 382 | 3536 2318 | 458 | 4301 2818 | 540 | 5132 3371 
10 298 | 2209 1430 | 364 | 2818 1840 | 459 | 3504 2280 | 546 | 4268 2780 | 641 | 5099 3340 
15 0 0 4423 2270 0 5678 2900} 0 7099 3620 0 8665 4410 0 10393 | 5300 
2 147 | 2719 1770 | 186 | 3467 2260 | 239 | 4304 2800 | 290 | 5232 3410 | 346 | 6251 4080 
5 229 | 2696 1748 | 283 | 3442 2235 | 355 | 4278 2777 | 426 | 5204 3385 | 501 | 6222 4057 
10 283 | 2659 1712 | 346 | 3402 2193 | 432 | 4234 2739 | 510 | 5159 3343 | 599 | 6175 4019 
15 318 | 2623 1675 | 385 | 3363 2150 | 479 | 4192 2700 | 564 5115 3300 | 665 | 6129 3980 
20 0 0 4948 2520 0 6376 3250 0 7988 4060 0 9785 | 4980 0 11753 | 6000 
2 139 | 3097 2000 | 175 | 3955 2570 220 | 4916 3200 | 269 5983 3910 | 321 | 7154 4700 
5 219 | 3071 1978 | 270 | 3926 2544 | 337 | 4885 3174 | 403 | 5950 3880 | 475 | 7119 4662 
10 273 | 3029 1940 | 334 | 3880 2500 | 413 | 4835 3130 | 489 | 5896 3830 | 573 | 7063 4600 
15 306 | 2988 1910 | 372 | 3835 2465 | 459 | 4786 3090 | 541 5844 | 3795 | 631 | 7007 4575 
20 335 | 2948 | 1880 | 404 | 3791 2430 | 495 | 4737 3050 | 585 | 5792 3760 | 689 | 6953 4550 
30 0 0 5725 | 2920 0 7420 3770} 0 9341 4750 0 11483 5850 0 13848 | 7060 
2 127 | 3696 2380 | 159 | 4734 3050 | 199 | 5900 3810 | 241 7194 | 4650 | 285 | 8617 5600 
5 206 | 3666 2350 | 252 | 4701 3020 | 312 | 5863 3783 | 373 | 7155 | 4622 | 439 | 8574 5559 
10 259 | 3617 2300 | 316 | 4647 2970 | 386 | 5803 3739 | 456 | 7090 4574 | 535 | 8505 5471 
15 292 | 3570 2250 | 354 | 4594 2920 | 431 | 5744 3695 | 507 | 7026 4527 | 590 | 8437 5391 
20 319 | 3523 2200 384 | 4542 2870 | 467 | 5686 3650 | 548 | 6964 4480 | 639 | 8370 5310 
30 369 | 3433 2130 | 440 | 4442 2785 | 540 | 5574 3565 | 635 | 6842 4375 | 739 | 8239 5225 
50 0 0 6711 3440 0 8774 4460) 0 11129 5635 0 13 767 | 6940 0 16694 8430 
2: 113 | 4554 2840 | 141 | 5864 3670) 171 | 7339 4630 | 209 | 8980 5695 | 251 | 10788 6860 
5 191 | 4520 2813 | 234 | 5826 3639 | 283 | 7295 4597 | 336 | 8933 5654 | 394 | 10737 6818 
10 243 |4464 2767 | 295 | 5763 3585 | 355 | 7224 4542 | 419 | 8855 5585 | 491 |10652 6749 
15 274 |4409 2721 | 330 | 5701 3534 | 396 | 7155 4511 465 | 8779 5546 | 542 | 10570 6710 
20 300 | 4356 2675 | 361 | 5641 3481 | 433 | 7086 4479 | 506 | 8704 5506 | 586 | 10488 6670 
30 347 | 4253 2631 | 412 | 5523 3431 | 494 | 6953 4421 | 577 | 8557 5444 | 672 | 10328 6603 
100 0 0 7914 | 4050 0 10 485 5300 | 0 13454 | 6700 0 16817 8600 0 | 20578 10300 
2 95 | 5834 3500 | 120 | 7591 4600 | 138 | 9577 5800 | 169 | 11803 7200 | 204 | 14264 8800 
5 172 | 5797 3475 | 208 | 7548 4566 | 245 | 9528 5769 | 293 | 11748 7162 | 341 | 14204 8756 
10 223 | 5737 3434 | 268 | 7478 4509 | 318 | 9447 5717 | 374 | 11658 7100 | 436 | 14105 8683 
15 252 | 5678 3392 | 304 | 7409 4451 | 358 | 9367 5665 | 418 | 11569 7037 | 487 | 14007 8610 
20 277 | 5619 3351 | 330 | 7341 4394 | 387 | 9289 5613 | 452 | 11482 6975 | 523 | 13910 8537 
30 319 | 5505 3267 | 378 | 7209 4279 | 446 | 9136 5509 | 514 | 11310 6850 | 592 | 13720 8391 
50 415 | 5289 3100 | 486 | 6956 4050 | 572 | 8841 5300 | 659 | 10979 6600 | 752 | 13354 8100 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


112 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(2) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(b)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 
VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L 

(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 

6 0 38 77 45 59 151 85 85 249 140 126 373 204 165 522 284 

2 39 51 36 60 96 66 85 156 104 123 231 156 159 320 213 

4 NA NA 33 74 92 63 102 152 102 146 225 152 187 313 208 

6 NA NA 31 83 89 60 114 147 99 163 220 148 207 307 203 

8 0 37 83 50 58 164 93 83 273 154 123 412 234 161 580 319 

2 39 56 39 59 108 75 83 176 119 121 261 179 155 363 246 

5 МА МА 37 77 102 69 107 168 114 151 252 171 193 352 235 

8 МА МА 33 90 95 64 122 161 107 175 243 163 223 342 225 

10 0 37 87 53 57 174 99 82 293 165 120 444 254 158 628 344 

2 39 61 41 59 117 80 82 193 128 119 287 194 153 400 272 

Э 52 56 39 76 111 76 105 185 122 148 277 186 190 388 261 

10 МА МА 34 97 100 68 132 171 112 188 261 171 237 369 241 

15 0 36 93 57 56 190 111 80 325 186 116 499 283 153 713 388 

2 38 69 47 57 136 93 80 225 149 115 337 224 148 473 314 

5 51 63 44 75 128 86 102 216 140 144 326 217 182 459 298 

10 NA NA 39 95 116 79 128 201 131 182 308 203 228 438 284 

15 NA NA NA NA NA 12 158 186 124 220 290 192 272 418 269 

20 0 35 96 60 54 200 118 78 346 201 114 537 306 149 772 428 

2 37 74 50 56 148 99 78 248 165 113 375 248 144 528 344 

5 50 68 47 73 140 94 100 239 158 141 363 239 178 514 334 

10 NA NA 4l 93 129 86 125 223 146 177 344 224 222 491 316 

15 NA NA NA NA NA 80 155 208 136 216 325 210 264 469 301 

20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 186 192 126 254 306 196 309 448 285 

30 0 34 99 63 53 211 127 76 372 219 110 584 334 144 849 472 

2 37. 80 56 55 164 111 76 281 183 109 429 279 139 610 392 

5 49 74 52 72 157 106 98 271 173 136 417 271 171 595 382 

10 NA NA NA 91 144 98 122 255 168 171 397 DS 213 570 367 

15 NA NA NA 115 131 NA 151 239 157 208 377 242 255 547 349 

20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 181 223 NA 246 357 228 298 524 333 

30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 389 4TT 305 

50 0 33 99 66 51 213 133 73 394 230 105 629 361 138 928 515 

2 36 84 61 53 181 121 73 318 205 104 495 312 133 712 443 

5 48 80 NA 70 174 117 94 308 198 131 482 305 164 696 435 

10 NA NA NA 89 160 NA 118 292 186 162 461 292 203 671 420 

15 МА NA NA 112 148 МА 145 273 174 199 441 280 244 646 405 

20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 176 257 NA 236 420 267 285 622 389 

30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 315 376 NA 373 573 NA 

100 0 NA NA NA 49 214 NA 69 403 NA 100 659 395 131 99] ბაა 

2 NA NA | NA 51 192 NA 70 351 NA 98 563 373 125 828 508 

5 NA NA NA 67 186 NA 90 342 NA 125 551 366 156 813 501 

10 NA NA NA 85 175 NA 113 324 NA 153 532 354 191 789 486 

15 NA NA NA 132 162 NA 138 310 NA 188 511 343 230 764 473 

20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 168 295 NA 224 487 NA 270 739 458 

30 NA NA NA NA NA NA 231 264 NA 301 448 NA 355 685 NA 

50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 540 584 NA 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 113 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(2) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL GAS VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(b)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 


VENT DIAMETER – D (inch) 
8 9 10 12 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

HEIGHT LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 

H L m = 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 0 211 695 369 267 894 469 371 1118 569 537 1639 849 
2 201 423 284 251 541 368 347 673 453 498 979 648 
4 237 416 2n 295 533 360 409 664 443 584 97] 638 
6 263 409 271 327 526 33 449 656 433 638 962 627 
8 0 206 777 414 258 1002 536 360 1257 658 521 1852 967 
2 197 482 321 246 617 417 339 768 513 486 1120 743 
5 245 470 311 305 604 404 418 754 500 598 1104 730 
8 280 458 300 344 591 392 470 740 486 665 1089 715 
10 0 202 844 449 253 1093 584 351 1373 718 507 2031 1057 
2 193 531 354 242 681 456 332 849 559 475 1242 848 
5 241 518 344 299 667 443 409 834 544 584 1224 825 
10 296 497 323 363 643 423 492 808 520 688 1194 788 
15 0 195 966 523 244 1259 681 336 1591 838 488 2374 1237 
2 187 631 413 232 812 543 319 1015 673 457 1491 983 
3 231 616 400 287 795 526 392 997 657 562 1469 963 
10 284 592 381 349 768 501 470 966 628 664 1433 928 
15 334 568 367 404 742 484 540 937 601 750 1399 894 
20 0 190 1053 573 238 1379 750 326 1751 27 473 2631 1346 
2 182 708 468 227 914 611 309 1146 754 443 1689 1098 
5 224 692 457 279 896 596 381 1126 734 547 1665 1074 
10 277 666 437 339 866 570 457 1092 702 646 1626 1037 
15 325 640 419 393 838 549 526 1060 677 730 1587 1005 
20 374 616 400 448 810 526 592 1028 651 808 1550 973 
30 0 184 1168 647 229 1542 852 312 1971 1056 454 2996 1545 
2 175 823 533 219 1069 698 296 1346 863 424 1999 1308 
5 215 806 521 269 1049 684 366 1324 846 524 1971 1283 
10 265 TTI 501 327 1017 662 440 1287 821 620 1927 1243 
15 312 750 481 379 985 638 507 1251 794 702 1884 1205 
20 360 723 461 433 955 615 570 1216 768 780 1841 1166 
30 461 670 426 541 895 574 704 1147 720 937 1759 1101 
50 0 176 1292 704 220 1724 948 295 2223 1189 428 3432 1818 
2 168 971 613 209 1273 811 280 1615 1007 401 2426 1509 
2 204 953 602 257 1252 795 347 1591 991 496 2396 1490 
10 253 923 583 313 1217 765 418 1551 963 589 2347 1455 
15 299 894 562 363 1183 736 481 1512 934 668 2299 1421 
20 345 866 543 415 1150 708 544 1473 906 741 2251 1387 
30 442 809 502 521 1086 649 674 1399 848 892 2159 1318 
100 0 166 1404 765 207 1900 1033 273 2479 1300 395 3912 2042 
2 158 1152 698 196 1532 933 259 1970 1168 371 3021 1817 
5 194 1134 688 240 1511 921 322 1945 1153 460 2990 1796 
10 238 1104 672 293 1477 902 389 1905 1133 547 2938 1763 
15 281 1075 656 342 1443 884 447 1865 1110 618 2888 1730 
20 325 1046 639 391 1410 864 507 1825 1087 690 2838 1696 
30 418 988 NA 491 1343 824 631 1747 1041 834 2739 1627 
50 617 866 NA 711 1205 NA 895 1591 NA 1138 2547 1489 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


114 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(3) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(c)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: SINGLE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TO BE USED WITH CHIMNEY AREAS WITHIN THE SIZE LIMITS AT BOTTOM 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 NA NA 28 NA NA 52 NA NA 86 NA NA 130 NA NA 180 
5 NA NA DS NA NA 49 NA NA 82 NA NA 117 NA NA 165 
8 2 NA NA 29 NA NA 55 NA NA 93 NA NA 145 NA NA 198 
5 NA NA 26 NA NA 52 NA NA 88 NA NA 134 NA NA 183 
8 NA NA 24 NA NA 48 NA NA 83 NA NA 127 NA NA 175 
10 2 NA NA 31 NA NA 61 NA NA 103 NA NA 162 NA NA 221 
5 NA NA 28 NA NA 57 NA NA 96 NA NA 148 NA NA 204 
10 NA NA 25 NA NA 50 NA NA 87 NA NA 139 NA NA 191 
15 2 NA NA 35 NA NA 67 NA NA 114 NA NA 179 53 475 250 
5 NA NA 35 МА МА 62 МА МА 107 МА МА 164 МА МА 231 
10 МА МА 28 МА МА 55 МА МА 97 МА МА 153 МА МА 216 
15 МА МА МА МА МА 48 МА МА 89 МА МА 141 МА МА 201 
20 2 МА МА 38 МА МА 74 МА МА 124 МА МА 201 51 522 274 
5 МА МА 36 МА МА 68 МА МА 116 МА МА 184 80 503 254 
10 МА МА МА МА МА 60 МА МА 107 МА МА 172 NA NA 237 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 97 NA NA 159 NA NA 220 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 83 NA NA 148 NA NA 206 
30 2 NA NA A] NA NA 82 NA NA 137 NA NA 216 47 581 303 
5 NA NA NA NA NA 76 NA NA 128 NA NA 198 75 561 281 
10 NA NA NA NA NA 67 NA NA 115 NA NA 184 NA NA 263 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 107 NA NA 171 NA NA 243 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 91 NA NA 159 NA NA 2273] 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 188 
50 2 NA NA NA NA NA 92 NA NA 161 NA NA 251 NA NA 351 
5 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 151 NA NA 230 NA NA 323 
10 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 138 NA NA 215 NA NA 304 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 127 NA NA 199 NA NA 282 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 185 NA NA 264 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Minimum 
internal area of 12 19 28 38 50 
chimney 
(square inches) 
Maximum 
intemal area of Seven times the listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet areas. 
chimney 
(square inches) 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 115 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(3) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(c)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TO BE USED WITH CHIMNEY AREAS WITHIN THE SIZE LIMITS AT BOTTOM 
8 9 10 12 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
HEIGHT LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L — 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 NA NA 247 NA NA 320 NA NA 401 NA NA 581 
5 NA NA 231 NA NA 298 NA NA 376 NA NA 561 
8 2 NA NA 266 84 590 350 100 728 446 139 1024 651 
5 NA NA 247 NA NA 328 149 711 423 201 1007 640 
8 NA NA 239 NA NA 318 173 695 410 231 990 623 
10 2 68 519 298 82 655 388 98 810 49] 136 1144 724 
5 NA NA DON) 124 638 365 146 791 466 196 1124 712 
10 NA NA 263 155 610 347 182 762 444 240 1093 668 
15 2 64 613 336 77 779 441 92 968 562 127 1376 841 
$ 99 594 313 118 759 416 139 946 533 186 1352 828 
10 126 565 296 148 727 394 173 912 567 229 1315 777 
15 МА МА 281 171 698 375 198 880 485 259 1280 742 
20 2 61 678 375 73 867 49] 87 1083 627 121 1548 953 
5 95 658 350 113 845 463 133 1059 597 179 1523 933 
10 122 627 332 143 811 440 167 1022 566 221 1482 879 
15 NA NA 314 165 780 418 191 987 541 251 1443 840 
20 NA NA 296 186 750 397 214 955 513 277 1406 807 
30 2 57 762 421 68 985 558 81 1240 717 111 1793 1112 
5 90 741 393 106 962 526 125 1216 683 169 1766 1094 
10 115 709 373 135 927 500 158 1176 648 210 1721 1025 
15 NA NA 353 156 893 476 181 1139 621 239 1679 981 
20 NA NA 332 176 860 450 203 1103 592 264 1638 940 
30 NA NA 288 NA NA 416 249 1035 555 318 1560 877 
50 2 51 840 477 61 1106 633 72 1413 812 99 2080 1243 
5 83 819 445 98 1083 596 116 1387 774 155 2052 1225 
10 NA NA 424 126 1047 567 147 1347 7133 195 2006 1147 
15 NA NA 400 146 1010 539 170 1307 702 222 1961 1099 
20 NA NA 376 165 977 511 190 1269 669 246 1916 1050 
30 NA NA 327 МА МА 468 233 1196 623 295 1832 984 
Minimum 
internal area of 63 78 95 132 
chimney 
(square inches) 
Maximum 
„е о Seven times the listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet areas. 
(square inches) 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


116 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(4) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(d)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 
SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR DIAMETER – D (inch) 
TO BE USED WITH CHIMNEY AREAS WITHIN THE SIZE LIMITS AT BOTTOM 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
HEIGHT | LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 NA NA 28 NA NA 52 NA | NA 86 NA | NA 130 | NA | NA 180 
5 NA NA 25 NA NA 48 NA | NA 81 NA | NA 116 NA | NA 164 
8 2 NA NA 29 NA NA 55 NA NA 93 NA | NA 145 NA | NA 197 
5 NA NA 26 NA NA 51 NA | NA 87 NA | NA 133 NA | NA 182 
8 NA NA 23 NA NA 47 NA NA 82 NA | NA 126 NA | NA 174 
10 2 NA NA 31 NA NA 61 NA | NA 102 NA | NA 161 NA | NA 220 
5 NA NA 28 NA NA 56 NA NA 95 NA | NA 147 NA | NA 203 
10 NA NA 24 NA NA 49 NA | NA 86 NA | NA 137 NA | NA 189 
15 2 NA NA 35 NA NA 67 NA | NA 113 NA | NA 178 166 473 249 
5 NA NA 32 NA NA 61 NA NA 106 NA | NA 163 NA | NA 230 
10 NA NA 27 NA NA 54 NA | NA 96 NA | NA 151 NA | NA 214 
15 NA NA МА NA NA 46 NA NA 87 NA | NA 138 NA | NA 198 
20 2 NA NA 38 NA NA 73 NA | NA 123 NA NA 200 163 520 273 
5 МА МА 35 МА МА 67 МА | МА 115 МА | МА 183 МА | МА 252 
10 МА NA | NA NA NA 59 NA | NA 105 NA | NA 170 | NA | NA 235 
15 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | NA 95 NA | NA 156 NA | NA 21] 
20 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | NA 80 NA | NA 144 | NA | NA 202 
30 2 NA NA 41 МА МА 81 NA | NA 136 NA | NA 215 158 578 302 
5 NA NA МА NA NA 75 МА | МА 127 МА | МА 196 МА | МА 279 
10 МА NA | NA NA NA 66 NA | NA 113 NA | NA 182 NA | NA 260 
15 NA NA МА NA NA МА NA NA 105 NA | NA 168 NA | NA 240 
20 NA NA | NA NA NA | NA NA NA 88 NA | NA 155 NA | NA 223 
30 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA NA МА NA | МА NA | МА | NA 182 
50 2 NA NA МА NA NA 9] NA NA 160 NA | NA 250 | NA | NA 350 
5 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | NA 149 NA | NA 228 NA | NA 321 
10 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | NA 136 NA | NA 212 NA | NA 301 
15 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | NA 124 NA | NA 195 NA | NA 278 
20 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA NA | NA NA | NA 180 | NA | NA 258 
30 NA NA МА NA NA | NA NA | МА NA NA | NA NA | МА | МА NA 
Minimum 
internal area of 12 19 28 38 50 
chimney 
(square inches) 
Maximum 
oc წ. Seven times the listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet areas. 
(square inches) 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 117 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(4) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(d)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 


SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TO BE USED WITH CHIMNEY AREAS WITHIN THE SIZE LIMITS AT BOTTOM 
8 9 10 12 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
HEIGHT LATERAL FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
H L — — ———À4 IL ——T——— 
(feet) (feet) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 NA NA 247 NA NA 319 NA NA 400 NA NA 580 
5 NA NA 230 NA NA 297 NA NA 375 NA NA 560 
8 2 NA NA 265 NA NA 349 382 725 445 549 1021 650 
5 NA NA 246 NA NA 3277 NA NA 422 673 1003 638 
8 NA NA 237 NA NA 317 NA NA 408 747 985 621 
10 2 216 518 297 271 654 387 373 808 490 536 1142 722 
5 МА МА 276 334 635 364 459 789 465 657 1121 710 
10 МА МА 261 МА МА 345 547 758 441 771 1088 665 
15 2 211 611 335 264 716 440 362 965 560 520 1373 840 
5 261 591 312 325 755 414 444 942 531 637 1348 825 
10 NA NA 294 392 722 392 531 907 504 749 1309 774 
15 NA NA 278 452 692 372 606 873 481 841 1272 738 
20 2 206 675 374 258 864 490 252 1079 625 508 1544 950 
5 255 655 348 317 842 461 433 1055 594 623 1518 930 
10 312 622 330 382 806 437 517 1016 562 733 1475 875 
15 NA NA 311 442 773 414 591 979 539 823 1434 835 
20 NA NA 292 NA NA 392 663 944 510 911 1394 800 
30 2 200 759 420 249 982 556 340 1237 715 489 1789 1110 
5 245 737 391 306 958 524 417 1210 680 600 1760 1090 
10 300 703 370 370 920 496 500 1168 644 708 1713 1020 
15 NA NA 349 428 884 471 572 1128 615 798 1668 975 
20 NA NA 327 NA NA 445 643 1089 585 883 1624 932 
30 NA NA 281 NA NA 408 NA NA 544 1055 1539 865 
50 2 191 837 475 238 1103 631 323 1408 810 463 2076 1240 
5 NA NA 442 293 1078 593 398 1381 710 571 2044 1220 
10 NA NA 420 355 1038 562 447 1337 728 674 1994 1140 
15 NA NA 395 NA NA 533 546 1294 695 761 1945 1090 
20 NA NA 370 NA NA 504 616 1251 660 844 1898 1040 
30 NA NA 318 NA NA 458 NA NA 610 1009 1805 970 
Minimum 
internal area of 63 78 95 132 
chimney 
(square inches) 
Maximum 
n d Seven times the listed appliance categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet areas. 
(square inches) 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


118 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(5) 
SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE OR TYPE B ASBESTOS-CEMENT VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(e)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: SINGLE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | CONNECTED DIRECTLY TO PIPE OR VENT 
DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TO BE USED WITH CHIMNEY AREAS WITHIN THE SIZE LIMITS AT BOTTOM 
3 4 5 6 7 8 10 12 
HEIGHT | LATERAL APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
(feet (feet) MAXIMUM APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
6 0 39 70 116 170 232 312 500 750 
2 31 55 94 141 194 260 415 620 
5 28 51 88 128 177 242 390 600 
8 0 42 76 126 185 252 340 542 815 
2 32 61 102 154 210 284 451 680 
5 29 56 95 141 194 264 430 648 
10 24 49 86 131 180 250 406 625 
10 0 45 84 138 202 279 372 606 912 
2 35 67 111 168 233 311 505 760 
5 32 61 104 153 215 289 480 724 
10 27 54 94 143 200 274 455 700 
15 МА 46 84 130 186 258 432 666 
15 0 49 91 151 223 312 420 684 1040 
2 39 72 122 186 260 350 570 865 
5 35 67 110 170 240 325 540 825 
10 30 58 103 158 223 308 514 795 
15 МА 50 93 144 207 291 488 760 
20 NA NA 82 132 195 273 466 726 
20 0 53 101 163 252 342 470 770 1190 
2 42 80 136 210 286 392 641 990 
5 38 74 123 192 264 364 610 945 
10 32 65 115 178 246 345 571 910 
15 МА 55 104 163 228 326 550 870 
20 МА МА 91 149 214 306 525 832 
30 0 56 108 183 276 384 529 878 1370 
2 44 84 148 230 320 441 730 1140 
5 МА 78 137 210 296 410 694 1080 
10 МА 68 125 196 274 388 656 1050 
15 МА МА 113 177 258 366 625 1000 
20 МА МА 99 163 240 344 596 960 
30 МА МА МА МА 192 295 540 890 
50 0 МА 120 210 310 443 590 980 1550 
2 МА 95 171 260 370 492 820 1290 
5 МА МА 159 234 342 474 780 1230 
10 МА МА 146 221 318 456 730 1190 
15 МА МА МА 200 292 407 705 1130 
20 МА МА МА 185 276 384 670 1080 
30 МА МА МА МА 222 330 605 1010 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 119 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.1.2(6) 
EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.1(f)]':? 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | SINGLE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | NAT 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


MINIMUM ALLOWABLE INPUT RATING OF SPACE-HEATING APPLIANCE IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 


VENT HEIGHT INTERNAL AREA OF CHIMNEY (square inches) 
H 
(feet) 12 19 28 38 50 63 78 113 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 37°F or greater 
6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20 NA NA 123 190 249 184 0 0 
30 NA NA NA NA NA 393 334 0 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 579 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 27°F to 36°F 
6 0 0 68 116 156 180 212 266 
8 0 0 82 127 167 187 214 263 
10 0 51 97 141 183 201 225 265 
15 NA NA NA NA 233 253 274 305 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 307 330 362 
30 NA NA NA NA NA 419 445 485 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 763 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 17°F to 26°F 
6 NA NA NA NA NA 215 259 349 
8 NA NA NA NA 197 226 264 352 
10 NA NA NA NA 214 245 278 358 
15 NA NA NA NA NA 296 331 398 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 352 387 457 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA 507 581 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 5°F to 16°F 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 416 
8 NA NA NA NA NA NA 312 423 
10 NA NA NA NA NA 289 331 430 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA 393 485 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 450 547 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 682 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 972 
Local 99% winter design temperature: -10?F to 4°F 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 484 
8 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 494 
10 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 513 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 586 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 650 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 805 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1003 


Local 99% winter design temperature: -11?F or lower 
Not recommended for any vent configurations 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 mê, °C = (°Е-32)/1.8 
Notes: 

! See Figure 510.1.10 for a map showing local 99 percent winter design temperatures in the United States. 

? NA: Not applicable. 


120 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(а)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT | CONNECTOR 
HEIGHT RISE FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
ai б Мїп Мах Мах Мїп Мах Мах Мїп Мах Мах Мїп Мах Мах Мїп Мах Мах 
6 1 22 37 26 35 66 46 46 106 T2 58 164 104 77 225 142 
2 23 41 31 37 75 55 48 121 86 60 183 124 79 253 168 
3 24 44 35 38 81 62 49 132 96 62 199 139 82 275 189 
8 1 22 40 27] 35 72 48 49 114 76 64 176 109 84 243 148 
2 23 44 92 36 80 57 51 128 90 66 195 129 86 269 175 
3 24 47 36 37 87 64 53 139 101 67 210 145 88 290 198 
10 1 22 43 28 34 78 50 49 123 78 65 189 113 89 257 154 
2 23 47 33 36 86 59 51 136 93 67 206 134 91 282 182 
3 24 50 S 37 92 67 52 146 104 69 220 150 94 303 205 
15 1 21 50 30 33 89 53 47 142 83 64 220 120 88 298 163 
2 22 53 35 35 96 63 49 153 99 66 235 142 91 320 193 
3 24 55 40 36 102 71 51 163 111 68 248 160 93 339 218 
20 1 21 54 31 33 99 56 46 157 87 62 246 125 86 334 171 
2 22 57 37 34 105 66 48 167 104 64 259 149 89 354 202 
3 23 60 42 35 110 74 50 176 116 66 271 168 91 371 228 
30 1 20 62 33 31 113 59 45 181 93 60 288 134 83 391 182 
2 21 64 39 33 118 70 47 190 110 62 299 158 85 408 215 
3 22 66 44 34 123 3/9) 48 198 124 64 309 178 88 423 242 
50 1 19 71 36 30 133 64 43 216 101 57 349 145 78 477 197 
2 21 73 43 32 137 76 45 223 119 59 358 172 81 490 234 
3 22 75 48 33 141 86 46 229 134 61 366 194 83 502 263 
100 1 18 82 Ey 28 158 66 40 262 104 53 442 150 73 611 204 
2 19 83 44 30 161 Eo 42 267 123 55 447 178 75 619 242 
3 20 84 50 31 163 89 44 272 138 57 452 200 78 627 272 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
4 5 6 7 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 
6 92 81 65 140 116 103 204 161 147 309 248 200 
8 101 90 1B 155 129 114 224 178 163 339 275 223 
10 110 97 79 169 141 124 243 194 178 367 299 242 
15 125 112 91 195 164 144 283 228 206 427 352 280 
20 136 123 102 215 183 160 314 255 229 475 394 310 
30 152 138 118 244 210 185 361 297 266 547 459 360 
50 167 153 134 279% 244 214 421 353 310 641 547 423 
100 175 163 NA 311 277 NA 489 421 NA 751 658 479 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 121 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(a)] (continued) 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT CONNECTOR 
HEIGHT RISE FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
fest (ise) Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 92 296 185 109 376 237 128 466 289 
2 95 333 220 112 424 282 131 526 345 
3 97 363 248 114 463 317 134 575 386 
8 1 100 320 194 118 408 248 138 507 303 
2 103 356 230 121 454 294 141 564 358 
3 105 384 258 123 492 330 143 612 402 
10 1 106 341 200 125 436 75] 146 542 314 
2 109 374 238 128 479 305 149 596 9770. 
3 111 402 268 131 515 342 152 642 417 
15 1 110 389 214 134 493 273 162 609 333 
2 112 419 253 137 532 323 165 658 394 
3 115 445 286 140 565 365 167 700 444 
20 1 107 436 224 131 552 285 158 681 347 
2 110 463 265 134 587 339 161 725 414 
3 113 486 300 137 618 383 164 764 466 
30 1 103 512 238 125 649 305 151 802 372 
2 105 535 282 129 679 360 155 840 439 
3 108 555 317 132 706 405 158 874 494 
50 1 97 627 257 120 797 330 144 984 403 
2 100 645 306 123 820 392 148 1014 478 
3 103 661 343 126 842 441 151 1043 538 
100 1 91 810 266 112 1038 341 135 1285 417 
2 94 822 316 115 1054 405 139 1306 494 
3 97 834 355 118 1069 455 142 1327 555 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 
6 404 314 260 547 434 335 672 520 410 
8 444 348 290 602 480 378 740 577 465 
10 477 377 315 649 522 405 800 627 495 
15 556 444 365 753 612 465 924 733 565 
20 621 499 405 842 688 523 1035 826 640 
30 720 585 470 979 808 605 1209 975 740 
50 854 706 550 1164 977 705 1451 1188 860 
100 1025 873 625 1408 1215 800 1784 1502 975 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


122 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(a)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
12 14 16 18 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT CONNECTOR FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
HEIGHT RISE 
წა წებ Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 174 7164 496 223 1046 653 281 1371 853 346 1772 1080 
4 180 897 616 230 1231 827 287 1617 1081 352 2069 1370 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
8 2 186 822 516 238 1126 696 298 1478 910 365 1920 1150 
4 192 952 644 244 1307 884 305 1719 1150 372 2211 1460 
6 198 1050 772 252 1445 1072 313 1902 1390 380 2434 1770 
10 2 196 870 536 249 1195 730 311 1570 955 379 2049 1205 
4 201 997 664 256 1371 924 318 1804 1205 387 2332 1535 
6 207 1095 792 263 1509 1118 325 1989 1455 395 2556 1865 
15 2 214 967 568 272 1334 790 336 1760 1030 408 2317 1305 
4 221 1085 712 279 1499 1006 344 1978 1320 416 2579 1665 
6 228 1181 856 286 1632 1222 351 2157 1610 424 27796 2025 
20 2 223 1051 596 291 1443 840 357 1911 1095 430 2533 1385 
4 230 1162 748 298 1597 1064 365 2116 1395 438 2778 1765 
6 237 1253 900 307 1726 1288 373 2287 1695 450 2984 2145 
30 2 216 1217 632 286 1664 910 367 2183 1190 461 2891 1540 
4 223 1316 792 294 1802 1160 376 2366 1510 474 3110 1920 
6 231 1400 952 303 1920 1410 384 2524 1830 485 3299 2340 
50 2 206 1479 689 273 2023 1007 350 2659 1315 435 3548 1665 
4 213 1561 860 281 2139 1291 359 2814 1685 447 3730 2135 
6 221 1631 1031 290 2242 1575 369 2951 2055 461 3893 2605 
100 2 192 1923 712 254 2644 1050 326 3490 1370 402 4707 1740 
4 200 1984 888 263 2731 1346 336 3606 1760 414 4842 2220 
6 208 2035 1064 272 2811 1642 346 3714 2150 426 4968 2700 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
12 14 16 18 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H «FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 
6 900 696 588 1284 990 815 1735 1336 1065 2253 1732 1345 
8 994 773 652 1423 1103 912 1927 1491 1190 2507 1936 1510 
10 1076 841 712 1542 1200 995 2093 1625 1300 2727 2113 1645 
15 1247 986 825 1794 1410 1158 2440 1910 1510 3184 2484 1910 
20 1405 1116 916 2006 1588 1290 2722 2147 1690 3561 2798 2140 
30 1658 1327 1025 2373 1892 1525 3220 2558 1990 4197 3326 2520 
50 2024 1640 1280 2911 2347 1863 3964 3183 2430 5184 4149 3075 
100 2569 2131 1670 3732 3076 2450 5125 4202 3200 6749 5509 4050 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 123 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(a)] (continued)* 
NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
20 22 24 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT CONNECTOR 
HEIGHT RISE FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
Tu წარ Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
8 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 471 2737 1800 560 3319 2180 662 3957 2590 
6 478 3018 2180 568 3665 2640 669 4373 3130 
10 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 486 2887 1890 581 3502 2280 686 4175 2710 
6 494 3169 2290 589 3849 27760 694 4593 3270 
15 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 523 3197 2060 624 3881 2490 734 4631 2960 
6 533 3470 2510 634 4216 3030 743 5035 3600 
20 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 554 3447 2180 661 4190 2630 772 5005 3130 
6 567 3708 2650 671 4511 3190 785 5392 3790 
30 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 619 3840 2365 728 4861 2860 847 5606 3410 
6 632 4080 2875 741 4976 3480 860 5961 4150 
50 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 580 4601 2633 709 5569 3185 851 6633 3790 
6 594 4808 3208 724 5826 3885 867 6943 4620 
100 2 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
4 523 5982 2750 639 7254 3330 769 8650 3950 
6 539 6143 3350 654 7453 4070 786 8892 4810 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
20 22 24 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H *FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 
6 2838 2180 1660 3488 2677 1970 4206 3226 2390 
8 3162 2439 1860 3890 2998 2200 4695 3616 2680 
10 3444 2665 2030 4241 3278 2400 5123 3957 2920 
15 4026 3133 2360 4971 3862 2790 6016 4670 3400 
20 4548 3552 2640 5573 4352 3120 6749 5261 3800 
30 5303 4193 3110 6539 5157 3680 7940 6247 4480 
50 6567 5240 3800 8116 6458 4500 9837 7813 5475 
100 8597 6986 5000 10 681 8648 5920 13 004 10 499 7200 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


124 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(2) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(b)]* 
NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT | CONNECTOR FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
HEIGHT RISE 

წარ "uM Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 NA NA 26 NA NA 46 NA NA 71 NA NA 102 207 223 140 
2 NA NA 31 NA NA 55 NA NA 85 168 182 123 215 251 167 

3 NA NA 34 NA NA 62 121 131 95 175 198 138 222 273 188 

8 1 NA NA D NA NA 48 NA NA 75 МА МА 106 226 240 145 
2 МА МА 32 МА МА 57 125 126 89 184 193 127 234 266 173 

3 NA NA 35 NA NA 64 130 138 100 191 208 144 241 287 197 

10 1 NA NA 28 NA NA 50 119 121 77 182 186 110 240 253 150 
2 МА МА 33 84 85 59 124 134 91 189 203 132 248 278 183 

3 NA NA 36 89 91 67 129 144 102 197 217 148 257 299 203 

15 1 NA NA 29 79 87 52 116 138 81 177 214 116 238 291 158 
2 NA NA 34 83 94 62 121 150 97 185 230 138 246 314 189 

3 NA NA 39 87 100 70 127 160 109 193 243 157 255 333 215 

20 1 49 56 30 78 97 54 115 152 84 175 238 120 233 325 165 
2 52 59 36 82 103 64 120 163 101 182 252 144 243 346 197 

3 55 62 40 87 107 72 125 172 113 190 264 164 252 363 223 

30 1 47 60 31 TT 110 57 112 175 89 169 278 129 226 380 175 
2 51 62 37 81 115 67 117 185 106 177 290 152 236 397 208 

3 54 64 42 85 119 76 122 193 120 185 300 172 244 412 235 

50 1 46 69 34 75 128 60 109 207 96 162 336 137 217 460 188 
2 49 71 40 79 132 12 114 215 113 170 345 164 226 473 223 

3 52 72 45 83 136 82 119 221 123 178 353 186 235 486 252 

100 1 45 | 79 24 | 71 | 150 | 61 | 104 24 | 98 | 153 | 424 140 | 205 | 585 | 192 
2 48 | 80 41 | 75 | 153 | 73 | 110 255 115 | 160 |428 167 | 212 | 593 | 228 

3 51 | 81 | 46 | 79 | 157 | 85 | 114 | 260 129 | 168 | 433 | 190 | 222 | 603 | 256 

COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
4 5 6 7 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H «FAN MI — «NAT | «FAN ოკა «NAT «FAN MI. «NAT «FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 

6 NA 78 64 NA 113 99 200 158 144 304 244 196 

8 NA 87 71 NA 126 111 218 173 159 331 269 218 
10 NA 94 76 163 137 120 237 189 174 357 292 236 
15 121 108 88 189 159 140 275 221 200 416 343 274 
20 131 118 98 208 177 156 305 247 223 463 383 302 
30 145 132 113 236 202 180 350 286 26517 533 446 349 
50 159 145 128 268 233 208 406 337 296 622 529 410 
100 166 153 NA 297 263 NA 469 398 NA 726 633 464 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 125 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(2) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(b)] (continued) 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT CONNECTOR 
HEIGHT RISE FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
წა" მიას Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 262 293 183 325 373 234 447 463 286 
2 271 331 219 334 422 281 458 524 344 
3 279 361 247 344 462 316 468 574 385 
8 1 285 316 191 352 403 244 481 502 299 
2 293 353 228 360 450 292 492 560 355 
3 302 381 256 370 489 328 501 609 400 
10 1 302 335 196 372 429 252 506 534 308 
2 311 369 235 381 473 302 517 589 368 
3 320 398 265 391 511 339 528 637 413 
15 1 312 380 208 397 482 266 556 596 324 
2 321 411 248 407 522 317 568 646 387 
3 331 438 281 418 557 360 579 690 437 
20 1 306 425 217 390 538 276 546 664 336 
2 317 453 259 400 574 331 558 709 403 
3 326 476 294 412 607 SIS 570 750 457 
30 1 296 497 230 378 630 294 528 779 358 
2 307 521 274 389 662 349 541 819 425 
3 316 542 309 400 690 394 555 855 482 
50 1 284 604 245 364 768 314 507 951 384 
2 294 623 293 376 793 315) 520 983 458 
3 304 640 331 387 816 423 535 1013 518 
100 1 269 774 249 345 993 321 476 1236 393 
2 279 788 299 358 1011 383 490 1259 469 
3 289 801 339 368 1027 431 506 1280 527 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 

(feet) 
6 398 310 251] 541 429 332 665 515 407 
8 436 342 285 592 473 373 730 569 460 
10 467 369 309 638 512 398 787 617 487 
15 544 434 357 738 599 456 905 718 553 
20 606 487 395 824 673 512 1013 808 626 
30 703 570 459 958 790 593 1183 952 723 
50 833 686 535 1139 954 689 1418 1157 838 
100 999 846 606 1378 1185 780 1741 1459 948 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


126 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(3) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(c)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY | 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT | CONNECTOR FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
HEIGHT RISE 
წარ nes Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 24 33 21 39 62 40 52 106 67 65 194 101 87 274 141 
2 26 43 28 41 79 52 53 133 85 67 230 124 89 324 173 
3 27 49 34 42 92 61 55 155 97 69 262 143 91 369 203 
8 1 24 39 22 39 72 41 55 117 69 71 213 105 94 304 148 
2 26 47 29 40 87 53 57 140 86 73 246 127 97 350 179 
3 27 52 34 42 97 62 59 159 98 75 269 145 99 383 206 
10 1 24 42 22 38 80 42 55 130 71 74 232 108 101 324 153 
2 26 50 29) 40 93 54 57 153 87 76 261 129 103 366 184 
3 27 55 35 41 105 63 58 170 100 78 284 148 106 397 | 209 
15 1 24 48 23 38 93 44 54 154 74 72 277 114 100 384 164 
2 25 55 31 39 105 55 56 174 89 74 299 134 103 419 192 
3 26 59 35 41 115 64 57 189 102 76 319 153 105 448 | 215 
20 1 24 52 24 37 102 46 53 172 71 71 313 119 98 437 173 
2 25 58 3l 39 114 56 55 190 91 73 335 138 101 467 199 
3 26 63 35 40 123 65 57 204 104 75 353 157 104 493 222 
30 1 24 54 25 37 111 48 52 192 82 69 357 127 96 504 187 
2 25 60 92 38 122 58 54 208 95 72 376 145 99 531 209 
3 26 64 36 40 131 66 56 221 107 74 392 163 101 554 233 
50 1 23 51 DS 36 116 51 51 209 89 67 405 143 92 582 | 213 
2 24 59 32 37 127 61 53 225 102 70 421 161 95 604 235 
3 26 64 36 39 135 69 55 237 115 72 435 180 98 624 260 
100 1 23 46 24 35 108 50 49 208 92 65 428 155 88 640 237 
2 24 53 31 37 120 60 51 224 105 67 444 174 92 660 | 260 
3 25 59 35 38 130 68 53 237 118 69 458 193 94 679 | 285 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches) 
12 19 28 38 50 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN *NAT +NAT | «FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 
6 NA 74 25 NA 119 46 NA 178 71 NA 257 103 NA 351 143 
8 NA 80 28 NA 130 53 NA 193 82 NA 279 119 NA 384 163 
10 NA 84 31 NA 138 56 NA 207 90 NA 299 131 NA 409 177 
15 NA NA 36 NA 152 67 NA 233 106 NA 334 152 523 467 212 
20 NA NA 41 NA NA 75) МА 250 122 МА 368 172 565 508 243 
30 МА МА МА МА МА МА МА 270 137 МА 404 198 615 564 278 
50 МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА 620 328 
100 МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА МА 348 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 127 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(3) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(c)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: |CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: ТҮРЕ B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
hi co ee FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
(fi ‘as (f 5 Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 104 370 201 124 479 253 145 599 319 
2 107 436 232 127 562 300 148 694 378 
3 109 491 270 129 633 349 151 795 439 
8 1 113 414 210 134 539 267 156 682 335 
2 116 473 240 137 615 311 160 776 394 
3 119 517 2776 139 672 358 163 848 452 
10 1 120 444 216 142 582 277. 165 739 348 
2 123 498 247 145 652 321 168 825 407 
3 126 540 281 147 705 366 171 893 463 
15 1 125 511 229 153 658 297 184 824 375 
2 128 558 260 156 718 339 187 900 432 
3 131 597 292 159 760 382 190 960 486 
20 1 123 584 239 150 752 312 180 943 397 
2 126 625 270 153 805 354 184 1011 452 
3 129 661 301 156 851 396 187 1067 505 
30 i 119 680 255 145 883 337 175 1115 432 
2 122 715 287 149 928 378 179 1171 484 
3 125 746 317 152 968 418 182 1220 535 
50 1 115 798 294 140 1049 392 168 1334 506 
2 118 827 326 143 1085 433 172 1379 558 
3 121 854 357 147 1118 474 176 1421 611 
100 i 109 907 334 134 1222 454 161 1589 596 
2 113 933 368 138 1253 497 165 1626 651 
3 116 956 399 141 1282 540 169 1661 705 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches) 
63 78 113 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT +FAN +NAT +NAT 
(feet) 

6 NA 458 188 NA 582 246 1041 853 NA 
8 NA 501 218 724 636 278 1144 937 408 
10 606 538 236 716 686 302 1226 1010 454 
15 682 611 283 874 781 365 1374 1156 546 
20 742 668 325 955 858 419 1513 1286 648 
30 816 747 381 1062 969 496 1702 1473 749 
50 879 831 461 1165 1089 606 1905 1692 922 
100 NA NA 499 NA NA 669 2053 1921 1058 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


128 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(4) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(d)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: |TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | CATEGORY I 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
3 4 5 6 7 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT | CONNECTOR FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
HEIGHT RISE | |  -. 
(fest) ат Міп Мах Мах Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 NA NA 21 NA NA 39 NA NA 66 179 191 100 231 271 140 
2 NA NA 28 NA NA 52 NA NA 84 186 227 123 239 321 172 
3 NA NA 34 NA NA 61 134 153 97 193 258 142 247 365 202 
8 1 NA NA 21 NA NA 40 NA NA 68 195 208 103 250 298 146 
2 NA NA 28 NA NA 52 137 139 85 202 240 125 258 343 177 
3 NA NA 34 NA NA 62 143 156 98 210 264 145 266 376 205 
10 1 МА МА 22 NA NA 41 130 151 70 202 225 106 267 316 151 
2 NA NA 29 NA NA 53 136 150 86 210 255 128 276 358 181 
3 NA NA 34 97 102 62 143 166 99 217 277 147 284 389 207 
15 1 NA NA 23 NA NA 43 129 151 73 199 271 112 268 376 161 
2 NA NA 30 92 103 54 135 170 88 207 295 132 277 411 189 
3 NA NA 34 96 112 63 141 185 101 215 315 151 286 439 213 
20 1 NA NA 23 87 99 45 128 167 76 197 303 117 265 425 169 
2 NA NA 30 91 111 55 134 185 90 205 325 136 274 455 195 
3 NA NA 35 96 119 64 140 199 103 213 343 154 282 481 219 
30 1 NA NA 24 86 108 47 126 187 80 193 347 124 259 492 183 
2 NA NA 31 91 119 57 132 203 93 201 366 142 269 518 205 
3 NA NA 35 95 127 65 138 216 105 209 381 160 277 540 229 
50 1 NA | МА 24 | 85 | 113. 50 | 124 | 204 87 | 188 | 392 | 139 | 252 | 567 | 208 
2 NA NA 31 89 123 60 130 218 100 196 408 158 262 588 230 
3 NA NA 35 94 131 68 136 231 112 205 422 176 271 607 255 
100 1 МА | NA 23 | 84 | 104 4 | 122 | 200 89 182 | 410 151 | 243 | 617 232 
2 NA | NA | 30 | 88 | 115 59 | 127 | 215 | 102 | 190 | 425 169 | 253 | 636 | 254 
3 NA | NA | 34 | 93 | 124 67 133 | 228 115 | 199 | 438 188 | 262 | 654 | 279 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches) 
12 19 28 38 50 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT | FAN | FAN NAT | FAN | FAN NAT | FAN | РАМ NAT | FAN | FAN | NAT | FAN | FAN | NAT 
H «FAN | «NAT — «NAT | «FAN | «NAT — «NAT | «FAN | «NAT | «NAT | «FAN | «NAT | «NAT | «FAN | «NAT | «NAT 
(feet) 
6 NA | NA | 25 | NA | 118 | 45 | NA | 176 | 71 | NA | 255 | 102 | NA | 348 | 142 
8 NA NA 28 NA 128 52 NA 190 81 NA 276 118 NA 380 162 
10 NA NA 31 NA 136 56 NA 205 89 NA 295 129 NA 405 175 
15 NA NA 36 NA NA 66 NA 230 105 NA 335 150 NA 400 210 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 74 NA 247 120 NA 362 170 NA 503 240 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 135 NA 398 195 NA 558 275 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 612 325 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 129 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(4) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(d)] (continued)* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: |CATEGORY I 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: |SINGLE-WALL METAL CONNECTOR 


VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
8 9 10 
APPLIANCE INPUT RATING LIMITS IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
„ა co ee FAN NAT FAN NAT FAN NAT 
წარ წა” MIი Max Max Min Max Max Min Max Max 
6 1 292 366 200 362 474 2S2 499 594 316 
2 301 432 231 373 557 299 509 696 376 
3 309 491 269 381 634 348 519 793 437 
8 1 313 407 207 387 530 263 529 672 331 
2 323 465 238 397 607 309 540 766 391 
3 332 509 274 407 663 356 551 838 450 
10 1 333 434 213 410 571 273 558 727 343 
2 343 489 244 420 640 317 569 813 403 
3 352 530 279 430 694 363 580 880 459 
15 1 349 502 225 445 646 291 623 808 366 
2 359 548 256 456 706 334 634 884 424 
3 368 586 289 466 755 378 646 945 479 
20 1 345 569 235 439 734 306 614 921 387 
2 355 610 266 450 787 348 627 986 443 
3 365 644 298 461 831 391 639 1042 496 
30 1 338 665 250 430 864 330 600 1089 421 
2 348 699 282 442 908 372 613 1145 473 
3 358 729 312 452 946 412 626 1193 524 
50 1 328 778 287 417 1022 383 582 1302 492 
2 339 806 320 429 1058 425 596 1346 545 
3 349 831 351 440 1090 466 610 1386 597 
100 1 315 875 328 402 1181 444 560 1537 580 
2 326 899 361 415 1210 488 575 1570 634 
3 337 921 392 427 1238 529 589 1604 687 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
MINIMUM INTERNAL AREA OF MASONRY CHIMNEY FLUE (square inches) 
63 78 113 
COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT 
HEIGHT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT FAN FAN NAT 
H +FAN +МАТ +МАТ «FAN +МАТ +МАТ +FAN +МАТ +МАТ 
(feet) 
6 NA 455 187 NA 579 245 NA 846 NA 
8 NA 497 217 NA 633 DIT 1136 928 405 
10 NA 532 234 771 680 300 1216 1000 450 
15 677 602 280 866 772 360 1359 1139 540 
20 765 661 321 947 849 415 1495 1264 640 
30 808 739 377 1052 957 490 1682 1447 740 
50 NA 821 456 1152 1076 600 1879 1672 910 
100 NA NA 494 NA NA 663 2006 1885 1046 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 


* NA: Not applicable. 


130 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(5) 
SINGLE-WALL METAL PIPE OR TYPE B ASBESTOS-CEMENT VENT [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(e)]* 
NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPMENT 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | DIRECT TO PIPE OR VENT 
VENT CONNECTOR CAPACITY 
VENT CONNECTOR DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TOTAL VENT CONNECTOR 3 4 5 6 7 8 
HEIGHT RISE 
H R MAXIMUM APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
(feet) (feet) 
1 21 40 68 102 146 205 
6-8 2 28 53 86 124 178 235 
3 34 61 98 147 204 275 
1 23 44 TI 117 179 240 
15 2 30 56 92 134 194 265 
3 35 64 102 155 216 298 
30 1 25 49 84 129 190 270 
and up 2 31 58 97 145 211 295 
3 36 68 107 164 232 321 
COMMON VENT CAPACITY 
COMMON VENT DIAMETER - D (inch) 
TOTAL VENT 4 5 6 7 8 10 12 
HEIGHT 
бый COMBINED APPLIANCE INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS ОЕ BTU PER HOUR 
6 48 78 111 155 205 320 NA 
8 55 89 128 175 234 365 505 
10 59 95 136 190 250 395 560 
15 71 115 168 228 305 480 690 
20 80 129 186 260 340 550 790 
30 МА 147 215 300 400 650 940 
50 МА МА МА 360 490 810 1190 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


TABLE 510.2(6) 
EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(f)]* 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | NAT + NAT 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
COMBINED APPLIANCE MAXIMUM INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 


VENT HEIGHT INTERNAL AREA OF CHIMNEY (square inches) 

H 

(feet) 12 19 28 38 50 63 78 113 
6 25 46 71 103 143 188 246 NA 
8 28 53 82 119 163 218 278 408 
10 31 56 90 131 177 236 302 454 
15 NA 67 106 152 212 283 365 546 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 325 419 648 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA 496 749 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 922 

100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 131 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(7) 
EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(9)]' 2 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: NAT + NAT 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE INPUT RATING OF SPACE-HEATING APPLIANCE IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT HEIGHT INTERNAL AREA OF CHIMNEY (square inches) 
аа 12 19 28 38 50 63 78 113 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 37?F or greater 
6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 NA 
8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 184 0 0 
30 NA NA NA NA NA 393 334 0 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 579 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 27°F to 36°F 
6 0 0 68 NA NA 180 212 NA 
8 0 0 82 NA NA 187 214 263 
10 0 51 NA NA NA 201 225 265 
15 NA NA NA NA NA 253 274 305 
20 NA NA NA NA NA 307 330 362 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA 445 485 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 763 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 17°F to 26°F 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
8 NA NA NA NA NA NA 264 352 
10 NA NA NA NA NA NA 278 358 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA 331 398 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA 387 457 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 581 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 862 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 5?F to 16°F 
6 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
8 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
10 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 430 
15 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 485 
20 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 547 
30 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 682 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 


Local 99% winter design temperature: 4°F or lower 
Not recommended for any vent configurations 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m, °С = (°F-32)/1.8 
Notes: 

! See Figure 510.1.10 for a map showing local 99 percent winter design temperatures in the United States. 

? NA: Not applicable. 


132 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 510.2(8) 
EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(h)]* 


WATER HEATERS 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: 


TWO OR MORE 


APPLIANCE TYPE: 


FAN + NAT 


APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: 


TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 


COMBINED APPLIANCE MAXIMUM INPUT RATING IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT HEIGHT INTERNAL AREA OF CHIMNEY (square inches) 
H 
(feet) 12 19 28 38 50 63 78 113 
6 74 119 178 257 351 458 582 853 
8 80 130 193 279 384 501 636 937 
10 84 138 207 299 409 538 686 1010 
15 NA 152 233 334 467 611 781 1156 
20 NA NA 250 368 508 668 858 1286 
30 NA NA NA 404 564 747 969 1473 
50 МА МА МА МА МА 831 1089 1692 
100 МА МА МА МА МА МА МА 1921 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 
* NA: Not applicable. 
2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 133 


WATER HEATERS 


TABLE 510.2(9) 


EXTERIOR MASONRY CHIMNEY [NFPA 54: TABLE 13.2(1)112 


NUMBER OF APPLIANCES: | TWO OR MORE 
APPLIANCE TYPE: | FAN + NAT 
APPLIANCE VENT CONNECTION: | TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL CONNECTOR 
MINIMUM ALLOWABLE INPUT RATING OF SPACE-HEATING APPLIANCE IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
VENT HEIGHT INTERNAL AREA OF CHIMNEY (square inches) 
ей 12 19 28 38 50 63 78 113 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 37?F or greater 
6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
10 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
15 NA 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
20 NA NA 123 190 249 184 0 0 
30 NA NA NA 334 398 393 334 0 
50 NA NA NA NA NA 714 707 579 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1600 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 27°F to 36°F 
6 0 0 68 116 156 180 212 266 
8 0 0 82 127 167 187 214 263 
10 0 51 97 141 183 201 225 265 
15 NA 111 142 183 233 253 274 305 
20 NA NA 187 230 284 307 330 362 
30 NA NA NA 330 319 419 445 485 
50 NA NA NA NA NA 672 705 763 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1554 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 17°F to 26°F 
6 0 55 99 141 182 215 259 349 
8 52 74 111 154 197 226 264 352 
10 NA 90 125 169 214 245 278 358 
15 NA NA 167 212 263 296 331 398 
20 NA NA 212 258 316 352 387 457 
30 NA NA NA 362 429 470 507 581 
50 NA NA NA NA NA 723 766 862 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1669 
Local 99% winter design temperature: 5?F to 16°F 
6 NA 78 121 166 214 252 301 416 
8 NA 94 135 182 230 269 312 423 
10 NA 111 149 198 250 289 331 430 
15 NA NA 193 247 305 346 393 485 
20 NA NA NA 293 360 408 450 547 
30 NA NA NA 377 450 531 580 682 
50 NA NA NA NA NA 797 853 972 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 1833 
Local 99% winter design temperature: -10°F to 4°F 
6 NA NA 145 196 249 296 349 484 
8 NA NA 159 213 269 320 371 494 
10 NA NA 175 231 292 339 397 513 
15 NA NA NA 283 351 404 457 586 
20 NA NA NA 333 408 468 528 650 
30 NA NA NA NA NA 603 667 805 
50 NA NA NA NA NA NA 955 1003 
100 NA NA NA NA NA NA NA NA 


Local 99% winter design temperature: -11?F or lower 
Not recommended for any vent configurations 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m, °C = (°F-32)/1.8 


Notes: 


1 See Figure 510.1.10 for a map showing local 99 percent winter design temperatures in the United States. 


? NA: Not applicable. 


134 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 


CHAPTER 6 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


Adopting Agency 


BSC 


BSC- 
CG 


SFM 


DSA 


OSHPD 


1-AC 


AC 


SS | SS/CC 


1R 


2 


3 


4 


BSCC 


DPH 


AGR 


DWR 


CEC 


CA 


SL 


SLC 


Adopt Entire Chapter 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


Figure 601 


601.2 Exceptions 3 & 4 


601.2 Exceptions 4, 5 & 6 


601.2 Exception 5 


601.2.1 


601.2.1.1 


601.2.1.2 


601.3.2 


601.3.3 


“|жж 2 X ж 


601.3.3 Exception 


601.4 


601.5 


601.6 


601.7 


601.8 


“|жж же ж 


603.5.11 


603.5.14, Note 


604.1 Exception 


Table 604.1 & Notes 3 - 5 


604.1.1 


604.1.2 


604.2 Note 


604.13 


X 


605.2.2 


605.9 


605.9.1 


605.10 


“| ж | X Xx X ж 
“|жж »X |жж ж X Xx ж 


605.10.1 


605.10.1.1 


“|жж же еж 


605.12.2 


> 
54 


605.15 


606.8 


609.10 


609.11 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


135 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 6 - WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION (continued) 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC ცც | SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR DWR (СЕС | CA | SL SLC 


1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 31415 16 


Adopt Entire Chapter X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X X XIX X XIX XXIX X X 


sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
609.12.3 X 
> Table 610.3 XX 

610.5 XX 
612.0 
612.1 X 
613.0 
Table 613.1 
614.0 
615.0 


(2 


“|жж ж 
“|жж ж 
2 X ж 
“|жж ж 


“я X x ж 


616.0 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


136 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 6 
WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


601.0 General. 


601.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materials, 
design, and installation of water supply systems, including 
methods and devices used for backflow prevention. 


601.2 Water Supply and Flushing. Each plumbing fix- 
ture shall be provided with an adequate supply of potable run- 
ning water piped thereto in an approved manner, so arranged 
as to flush and keep it in a clean and sanitary condition with- 
out danger of backflow or cross-connection. Water closets 
and urinals shall be flushed using an approved flush tank or 
flushometer valve. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Listed fixtures that do not require water for their opera- 
tion and are not connected to the water supply. 


(2) Where not deemed necessary for safety and sanitation by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


(3) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] For limited-density owner-built 
rural dwellings, potable water shall be available to the 
dwelling site, although such water need not be pressur- 
ized. Where water is not piped from a well, spring, cistern 
or other source, there shall be a minimum reserve of 50 
gallons (189 L) of potable water available. Where water 
delivery is pressurized, piping shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the provisions of this chapter. 


(4) [HCD 1, HCD 2 & DWR] For all residential occupan- 
cies, alternate water sources may be allowed as speci- 
fied in Chapter 15 of this code in addition to potable 
water. 


(5) [BSC-CG & DWR] For non-residential occupancies, 
alternate water sources may be allowed as specified in 
Chapter 15 of this code. 


(6) [DWR] Where a public agency requires a building to use 
recycled water to flush water closets and urinals in 
accordance with California Water Code 13554. 


601.2.1 Submeters. [HCD 1] Submeters (or meters) 
shall be installed to measure potable and reclaimed 
(recycled) water (hot and cold) that is supplied for the 
exclusive use of an individual dwelling unit within a 
newly constructed, multiunit rental residential structure; 
or for the use of an individual dwelling unit within a 
newly constructed mixed-use rental residential/commer- 
cial structure. Submeters (or meters) shall be installed 
in accordance with this code and the manufacturer 5 
installation instructions. 


See Water Code Section 517 for definitions of 
"multiunit residential structure" and “mixed-use resi- 
dential and commercial structure. " See also Civil Code 
commencing with Section 1954.201. 


Exemptions: 


(1) Long-term health care facilities as defined in Health 
and Safety Code Section 1416. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(2) Low-income housing as defined in Health and Safety 
Code Section 17922.14 (c)(2)(B). 


Residential care facilities for the elderly as defined 
in Health and Safety Code Section 1569.2 (p)(1). 


(4) Housing at a place of education as defined in Title 
24 of the California Code of Regulations, Califor- 
nia Building Code, Part 2, Section 202. 


(5) Time-share property as defined in Business and Pro- 
fessions Code Section 11212, Subdivision (aa). 


601.2.1.1 Approved Submeters. [HCD 1] Sub- 
meters (or meters) shall be approved in accordance 
with the Business and Professions Code, Division 5. 


601.2.1.2 Submeter Testing. [HCD 1] Submeter 
(or meter) testing shall be in accordance with the 
California Code of Regulations, Title 4, Division 9, 
Chapter 3, Article 1; Civil Code, Division 3, Part 4, 
Title 5; and Business and Professions Code, Divi- 
sion 5. 


601.2.2 Hot and Cold Water Required. In occupan- 
cies where plumbing fixtures are installed for private use, 
hot water shall be required for bathing, washing, laundry, 
cooking purposes, dishwashing or maintenance. In occu- 
pancies where plumbing fixtures are installed for public 
use, hot water shall be required for bathing and washing 
purposes. This requirement shall not supersede the 
requirements for individual temperature control limita- 
tions for public lavatories and public and private bidets, 
bathtubs, whirlpool bathtubs, and shower control valves. 


601.3 Identification of a Potable and Nonpotable 
Water System. In buildings where potable water and non- 
potable water systems are installed, each system shall be 
clearly identified in accordance with Section 601.3.1 through 
Section 601.3.5. 
601.3.1 Potable Water. Green background with white 
lettering. 


601.3.2 Color and Information. Each system shall be 
identified with a colored pipe or band and coded with 
paints, wraps, and materials compatible with the piping. 


G 


NS 


Except as required by Section 601.3.3, nonpotable 
water systems shall have a yellow background with black 
uppercase lettering, with the words “CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE WATER, DO NOT DRINK.” Each non- 
potable system shall be identified to designate the liquid 
being conveyed, and the direction of normal flow shall be 
clearly shown. The minimum size of the letters and 
length of the color field shall comply with Table 601.3.2. 
[HCD 1 & HCD 2] An international symbol of a glass 
in a circle with a slash through it shall be provided sim- 
ilar to that shown in Figure 601 for all nonpotable water 
systems. 


137 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


FIGURE 601 
INTERNATIONAL SYMBOL 


The background color and required information 
shall be indicated every 20 feet (6096 mm) but not less 
than once per room, and shall be visible from the floor 
level. 


601.3.3 Alternate Water Sources. Alternate water 
source systems shall have a purple (Pantone color No. 
512, 522C, or equivalent) background with uppercase 
lettering and shall be field or factory marked as follows: 


(1) Gray water systems shall be marked in accordance 
with this section with the words *CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE GRAY WATER, DO NOT DRINK" in 
black letters. 


Reclaimed (recycled) water systems for outdoor 
applications shall be marked in accordance with this 
section with the words: “CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE RECLAIMED (RECYCLED) WATER, 
DO NOT DRINK" in black letters. 


On-site treated water systems shall be marked in 
accordance with this section with the words: *CAU- 
TION: ON-SITE TREATED NONPOTABLE 
WATER, DO NOT DRINK" in black letters. 


Rainwater catchment systems shall be marked in 
accordance with this section with the words: *CAU- 
TION: NONPOTABLE RAINWATER, DO NOT 
DRINK" in black letters. 

Exception: [DWR] For recycled water supply systems 
that are within or a part of a building, the provisions of 
Section 1505.7 shall apply. 


(2 


МУ 


(3 


— 


(4 


— 


TABLE 601.3.2 


MINIMUM LENGTH OF COLOR FIELD AND SIZE OF LETTERS 


Е MINIMUM LENGTH OF | MINIMUM SIZE OF 
COLOR FIELD LETTERS 
COVERING (inches) (inches) 
(inches) 
ТЕГ; 8 A 
1% to2 8 А 
2h to 6 12 LM 
8 to 10 24 24 
Over 10 32 a 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


138 


601.3.4 Fixtures. Where vacuum breakers or backflow 
preventers are installed with fixtures listed in Chapter 17, 
identification of the discharge side shall be permitted to 
be omitted. 


601.3.5 Outlets. Each outlet on the nonpotable water 
line that is used for special purposes shall be posted with 
black uppercase lettering as follows: “CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE WATER, DO NOT DRINK.” 
601.4 Schools of Cosmetology and Cosmetological 
Establishments. [CA] 
601.4.1 Hot- and Cold-Running Water. At least one 
sink with hot-and cold-running water shall be provided 
in each work area or workroom where hairdressing is 
performed in each school and establishment. 
601.4.2 Handwashing Facilities. Each school and 
establishment shall provide adequate handwashing facil- 
ities, including hot-and cold-running water, located 
within or adjacent to the toilet room or rooms in accor- 
dance with Table 422.1. 


601.4.3 Drinking Water. Each school and establishment 
shall supply potable drinking water convenient to students, 
patrons and employees. Approved sanitary drinking foun- 
tains shall be installed and so regulated that a jet of at 
least 2 inches (51 mm) shall be constantly available. 


601.5 Meat and Poultry Processing Plants. [AGR] 
Except as provided in Section 601.5.4, the water supply shall 
be ample and potable, with adequate pressure and facilities 
for its distribution in the plant, and its protection against con- 
tamination and pollution. 


Note: A water report, issued under the authority of the state 
health agency, certifying to the potability of the water supply, 
shall be obtained by the applicant and furnished to the admin- 
istrator whenever such report is required by the administrator. 


601.5.1 A supply of hot water shall be available. 


601.5.2 Hose connections with steam and water-mixing 
valves or hot-water hose connections shall be provided at 
locations throughout the plant. 


601.5.3 The refuse rooms shall be provided with facilities 
for washing refuse cans and other equipment in the rooms. 


601.5.4 Non-potable water is permitted only in those parts 
of official plants where no product is handled or prepared, 
and then only for limited purposes, such as on condensers 
not connected with the potable water supply, in vapor lines 
serving inedible product rendering tanks, and in sewer lines 
for moving heavy solids in the sewage. In all cases, non- 
potable water lines shall be clearly identified and shall not 
be cross connected with the potable water supply. 


Exception: Cross connection is permitted if this is nec- 
essary for fire protection and such connection is of a type 
with a break to ensure against accidental contamination, 
and to be approved by local authorities and by the 
Department. 


601.5.5 Equipment using potable water shall be so 
installed as to prevent back-siphonage into the potable 
water system. 

601.5.6 АП pipelines, reservoirs, tanks, cooling towers 
and like equipment employed in handling reused water 
shall be constructed and installed so as to facilitate their 
cleaning and inspection. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


601.5.7 Hot water of such temperature as to accomplish 
a thorough cleanup shall be delivered under pressure to 
outlets. 


601.5.7.1 An ample supply of water at not less than 
180°F (82°C) shall be available when used for san- 
itizing purposes. 
601.5.8 Pens, alleys, and runways shall have hose con- 
nections for cleanup purposes. 


601.6 Collection Centers and Facilities. [AGR] 


601.6.1 The water supply shall be ample with facilities 
for its distribution. An ample supply of water at not less 
than 180°F (82°C), or other suitable method. 


601.6.2 The vehicle cleaning and sanitizing area shall be 
provided with adequate line steam, producing a temper- 
ature of at least 180°F (82°C), or other suitable method. 


601.6.3 Hose connections with steam and water-mixing 
valves of hot-and cold-water hose connections shall be 
provided at locations throughout the building and at 
unloading and vehicle cleaning slabs. 


601.7 Renderers. [AGR] This area shall be provided with 
live steam or other method of sanitizing vehicles. 


601.8 Horse Meat and Pet Food Establishments. [AGR] 


601.8.1 The water supply shall be ample, clean and 
potable, with facilities for its distribution in the plant, 
and its protection against contamination and pollution. 


601.8.1.1 Equipment using potable water shall be 
so installed as to prevent back-siphonage into the 
potable water system. 


601.8.1.2 Non-potable water is permitted only in those 
parts of official plants where no edible product is han- 
dled or prepared, and then only for limited purposes, 
such as on ammonia condensers not connected with 
the potable water supply, in vapor lines serving inedi- 
ble product rendering tanks, in connection with equip- 
ment used for washing and washing inedible products 
preparatory to tanking, and in sewer lines for moving 
heavy solids in sewage. In all cases, non-potable water 
lines shall be clearly identified and shall not be cross 
connected with the potable water supply. 


Exception: Cross connection is permitted if this is 
necessary for fire protection, and such connection is 
of a type with a break to ensure against accidental 
contamination, and is approved by local authorities 
or by the Department. 


601.8.2 All pipelines, reservoirs, tanks, cooling towers, 
and like equipment employed in handling reused water 
shall be constructed and installed so as to facilitate their 
cleaning and inspection. 


601.8.3 Hot water for cleaning rooms and equipment 

shall be delivered under pressure to outlets and shall be 

of such temperature as to accomplish a thorough cleanup. 
601.8.3.1 An ample supply of water at not less than 
180°F (82°C) shall be available when used for san- 
itizing purposes. 

601.8.4 Pens, alleys, and runways shall have hose con- 

nections for cleanups purposes. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


602.0 Unlawful Connections. 


602.1 Prohibited Installation. No installation of potable 
water supply piping, or part thereof, shall be made in such a 
manner that it will be possible for used, unclean, polluted, or 
contaminated water, mixtures, or substances to enter a por- 
tion of such piping from a tank, receptor, equipment, or 
plumbing fixture by reason of backsiphonage, suction, or 
other cause, either during normal use and operation thereof, 
or where such tank, receptor, equipment, or plumbing fixture 
is flooded or subject to pressure exceeding the operating pres- 
sure in the hot or cold water piping. 


602.2 Cross-Contamination. No person shall make a con- 
nection or allow one to exist between pipes or conduits car- 
rying domestic water supplied by a public or private building 
supply system, and pipes, conduits, or fixtures containing or 
carrying water from any other source or containing or carry- 
ing water that has been used for any purpose whatsoever, or 
piping carrying chemicals, liquids, gases, or substances what- 
soever, unless there is provided a backflow prevention device 
approved for the potential hazard and maintained in accor- 
dance with this code. Each point of use shall be separately 
protected where potential cross-contamination of individual 
units exists. 


602.3 Backflow Prevention. No plumbing fixture, device, 
or construction shall be installed or maintained, or shall bel 
connected to a domestic water supply, where such installa- 
tion or connection provides a possibility of polluting such 
water supply or cross-connection between a distributing sys- 
tem of water for drinking and domestic purposes and water 
that becomes contaminated by such plumbing fixture, device, 
or construction unless there is provided a backflow prevention 
device approved for the potential hazard. 


602.4 Approval by Authority. No water piping supplied 
by a private water supply system shall be connected to any 
other source of supply without the approval of the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction, Health Department, or other department 
having jurisdiction. 


603.0 Cross-Connection Control. 


603.1 General. Cross-connection control shall be provided 
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 


No person shall install a water-operated equipment or 
mechanism, or use a water-treating chemical or substance, 
where it is found that such equipment, mechanism, chemical, 
or substance causes pollution or contamination of the domes- 
tic water supply. Such equipment or mechanism shall be per- 
mitted where equipped with an approved backflow prevention 
device or assembly. 


603.2 Approval of Devices or Assemblies. Before a 
device or an assembly is installed for the prevention of back- 
flow, it shall have first been approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. Devices or assemblies shall be tested in 
accordance with recognized standards or other standards 
acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Backflow 
prevention devices and assemblies shall comply with Table 
603.2, except for specific applications and provisions as 
stated in Section 603.5.1 through Section 603.5.22. 


139 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


Devices or assemblies installed in a potable water supply 
system for protection against backflow shall be maintained 
in good working condition by the person or persons having 
control of such devices or assemblies. Such devices or assem- 
blies shall be tested at the time of installation, repair, or relo- 
cation and not less than on an annual schedule thereafter, or 
more often where required by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion. Where found to be defective or inoperative, the device 
or assembly shall be repaired or replaced. No device or 
assembly shall be removed from use or relocated or other 
device or assembly substituted, without the approval of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Testing or maintenance shall be performed by a certified 
backflow assembly tester or repairer certified in accordance 
with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 5000 or any other additional 
certification approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


603.3 Backflow Prevention Devices, Assemblies, and 
Methods. Backflow prevention devices, assemblies, and 
methods shall comply with Section 603.3.1 through Section 
603.3.12. 


603.3.1 Air Gap. The minimum air gap to afford back- 
flow protection shall be in accordance with Table 603.3.1. 


603.3.2 Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker (AVB). An 
atmospheric vacuum breaker consists of a body, a check- 
ing member, and an atmospheric port. 


603.3.3 Hose Connection Backflow Preventer. A 
hose connection backflow preventer consists of two inde- 
pendent check valves with an independent atmospheric 
vent between and a means of field testing and draining. 


603.3.4 Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention 
Assembly (DC). A double check valve backflow pre- 
vention assembly consists of two independently acting 
internally loaded check valves, four properly located test 
cocks, and two isolation valves. 


603.3.5 Pressure Vacuum Breaker Backflow Pre- 
vention Assembly (PVB). A pressure vacuum breaker 
backflow prevention assembly consists of a loaded air 
inlet valve, an internally loaded check valve, two prop- 
erly located test cocks, and two isolation valves. This 
device shall be permitted to be installed indoors where 
provisions for spillage are provided. 


603.3.6 Spill-Resistant Pressure Vacuum 
Breaker (SVB). A pressure-type vacuum breaker back- 
flow prevention assembly consists of one check valve 
force loaded closed and an air inlet vent valve force 
loaded open to atmosphere, positioned downstream of 
the check valve and located between and including two 
tightly closing shutoff valves and test cocks. 


603.3.7 Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow 
Prevention Assembly (RP). A reduced-pressure prin- 
ciple backflow prevention assembly consists of two inde- 
pendently acting internally loaded check valves, a 
differential pressure relief valve, four properly located 
test cocks, and two isolation valves. 


603.3.8 Double Check Detector Fire Protection 
Backflow Prevention Assembly. A double check 
valve backflow prevention assembly with a parallel 


140 


detector assembly consisting of a water meter and a dou- 
ble check valve backflow prevention assembly (DC). 


603.3.9 Reduced Pressure Detector Fire Protec- 
tion Backflow Prevention Assembly. A reduced- 
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a 
parallel detector assembly consisting of a water meter 
and a reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention 
assembly (RP). 


603.3.10 Dual Check Backflow Preventer. A dual 
check backflow preventer consists of two independently 
acting check valves, force loaded to a normally closed 
position. 


603.3.11 Laboratory Faucet Backflow Preven- 
ters. Laboratory faucet backflow preventers shall com- 
ply with ASSE 1035. 


603.3.12 Backflow Preventer with Intermediate 
Atmospheric Vent. A backflow preventer with inter- 
mediate atmospheric vent consists of two independently 
acting check valves, force loaded to a normally closed 
position, and an intermediate chamber with a means for 
automatically venting to atmosphere, force loaded to a 
normally open position. 


603.4 General Requirements. Assemblies shall comply 
with listed standards and be acceptable to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, with jurisdiction over the selection and 
installation of backflow prevention assemblies. 


603.4.1 Backflow Prevention Valve. Where more 
than one backflow prevention valve is installed on a sin- 
gle premise, and the valves are installed in one location, 
each separate valve shall be permanently identified by 
the permittee in a manner satisfactory to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


603.4.2 Testing. The premise owner or responsible per- 
son shall have the backflow prevention assembly tested 
by a certified backflow assembly tester at the time of 
installation, repair, or relocation and not less than on an 
annual schedule thereafter, or more often where required 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. The periodic test- 
ing shall be performed in accordance with the procedures 
referenced in ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 5000 by al 
tester qualified in accordance with those standards. The 
field test kit used shall comply with ASSE 1064. 


603.4.3 Access and Clearance. Access and clear- 
ance shall be provided for the required testing, mainte- 
nance, and repair. Access and clearance shall be in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and not 
less than 12 inches (305 mm) between the lowest portion 
of the assembly and grade, floor, or platform. Installa- 
tions elevated that exceed 5 feet (1524 mm) above the 
floor or grade shall be provided with a platform capable 
of supporting a tester or maintenance person. 


603.4.4 Connections. Direct connections between 
potable water piping and sewer-connected wastes shall 
not be permitted to exist under any condition with or 
without backflow protection. Where potable water is dis- 
charged to the drainage system, it shall be by means of an 
approved air gap of two pipe diameters of the supply 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


inlet, but in no case shall the gap be less than 1 inch (25.4 
mm). Connection shall be permitted to be made to the 
inlet side of a trap provided that an approved vacuum 
breaker 1s installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm), or 
the distance according to the device's listing, above the 
flood-level rim of such trapped fixture, so that at no time 
will such device be subjected to backpressure. 


603.4.5 Hot Water Backflow Preventers. Backflow 
preventers for hot water exceeding 110?F (43?C) shall 
be a type designed to operate at temperatures exceeding 
110?F (43°C) without rendering a portion of the assem- 
bly inoperative. 

603.4.6 Integral Backflow Preventers. Fixtures, 
appliances, or appurtenances with integral backflow pre- 
venters or integral air gaps manufactured as a unit shall 
be installed in accordance with their listing requirements 
and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


603.4.7 Freeze Protection. In cold climate areas, 
backflow assemblies and devices shall be protected from 
freezing with an outdoor enclosure that complies with 
ASSE 1060 or by a method acceptable to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


603.4.8 Drain Lines. Drain lines serving backflow 
devices or assemblies shall be sized in accordance with 
the discharge rates of the manufacturer's flow charts of 
such devices or assemblies. 


603.4.9 Prohibited Locations. Backflow prevention 
devices with atmospheric vents or ports shall not be 
installed in pits, underground, or submerged locations. 
Backflow preventers shall not be located in an area con- 
taining fumes that are toxic, poisonous, or corrosive. 


603.5 Specific Requirements. Specific requirements for 
backflow prevention shall comply with Section 603.5.1 
through Section 603.5.22. 


603.5.1 Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker. Water 
closet and urinal flushometer valves shall be protected 
against backflow by an approved backflow prevention 
assembly, device, or method. Where the valves are 
equipped with an atmospheric vacuum breaker, the vac- 
uum breaker shall be installed on the discharge side of 
the flushometer valve with the critical level not less than 
6 inches (152 mm), or the distance according to its list- 
ing, above the overflow rim of a water closet bowl or the 
highest part of a urinal. 


603.5.2 Ballcock. Water closet and urinal tanks shall 
be equipped with a ballcock. The ballcock shall be 
installed with the critical level not less than 1 inch (25.4 
mm) above the full opening of the overflow pipe. In 
cases where the ballcock has no hush tube, the bottom of 
the water supply inlet shall be installed 1 inch (25.4 mm) 
above the full opening of the overflow pipe. 

603.5.3 Backflow Prevention. Water closet 
flushometer tanks shall be protected against backflow by 
an approved backflow prevention assembly, device, or 
method. 

603.5.4 Heat Exchangers. Heat exchangers used for 
heat transfer, heat recovery, or solar heating shall protect 
the potable water system from being contaminated by the 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


heat-transfer medium. Single-wall heat exchangers used 
in indirect-fired water heaters shall meet the require- 
ments of Section 505.4.1. Double-wall heat exchangers 
shall separate the potable water from the heat-transfer 
medium by providing a space between the two walls that 
are vented to the atmosphere. 


603.5.5 Water Supply Inlets. Water supply inlets to 
tanks, vats, sumps, swimming pools, and other receptors 
shall be protected by one of the following means: 


(1) An approved air gap. 
(2) A listed vacuum breaker installed on the discharge 


side of the last valve with the critical level not less than 
6 inches (152 mm) or in accordance with its listing. 


(3) A backflow preventer suitable for the degree of haz- 
ard, installed in accordance with the requirements 
for that type of device or assembly as set forth in this 
chapter. 


603.5.6 Protection from Lawn Sprinklers and Irri- 
gation Systems. Potable water supplies to systems 
having no pumps or connections for pumping equipment, 
and no chemical injection or provisions for chemical 
injection, shall be protected from backflow by one of the 
following devices: 


(1) Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) 


(2) Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention 
assembly (PVB) 


(3) Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB) 


(4) Reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention 
assembly (RP) 


(5) A valve complying with IAPMO PS 72 


603.5.6.1 Systems with Pumps. Where sprin- 
kler and irrigation systems have pumps, connections 
for pumping equipment, or auxiliary air tanks, or are 
otherwise capable of creating backpressure, the 
potable water supply shall be protected by the fol- 
lowing type of device where the backflow device is 
located upstream from the source of backpressure: 


(1) Reduced-pressure principle backflow preven- 
tion assembly (RP) 

603.5.6.2 Systems with Backflow Devices. 

Where systems have a backflow device installed 

downstream from a potable water supply pump or a 

potable water supply pump connection, the device 

shall be one of the following: 


(1) Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) 

(2) Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention 
assembly (PVB) 

(3) Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB) 

(4) Reduced-pressure principle backflow preven- 
tion assembly (RP) 


603.5.6.3 Systems with Chemical Injectors. 
Where systems include a chemical injector or pro- 
visions for chemical injection, the potable water sup- 
ply shall be protected by a reduced-pressure 
principle backflow prevention assembly (RP). 


141 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


TABLE 603.2 
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES, ASSEMBLIES, AND METHODS 


DEGREE OF HAZARD 


POLLUTION CONTAMINATION 
DEVICE, ASSEMBLY, APPLICABLE (LOW HAZARD) (HIGH HAZARD) 23 
1 INSTALLATION^ 
OR METHOD STANDARDS BACK- BACK- BACK- BACK- 
SIPHONAGE | PRESSURE | SIPHONAGE | PRESSURE 
Air gap ი. X — X — See Table 603.3.1 in this chapter. 
Air gap fittings for use Air gap fitting is a device with an internal air 
with plumbing fixtures, ASME gap, and typical installation includes 
appliances, and appurte- ГЕРИ X = X — plumbing fixtures, appliances, and 
nances n appurtenances. The critical level shall not be 
installed below the flood level rim. 
Antisiphon fill valve ASSE 1002/ Installation of gravity water closet flush tank 
(ballcocks) for gravity ASME X X and urinal tanks with the fill valve installed 
water closet flush tanks A112.1002/ zn ES with the critical level not less than 1 inch 
and urinal tanks CSA B125.12 above the opening of the overflow pipe.^? 
Atmospheric vacuum Upright position. Have outlet open to 
breaker (consists of a ASSE 1001 or X x atmosphere. Minimum of 6 inches or listed 
body, checking member | CSA B64.1.1 . i distance above all downstream piping and 
and atmospheric port) flood level rim of receptor. ^? 
Backflow preventer for 
Carbonated Beverage Installation includes carbonated beverage 
Dispensers (two inde- machines or dispensers. These devices 
pendent check valves ASSE 1022 2 x 2 х operate under intermittent or continuous 
with a vent to the atmos- pressure conditions. 
phere) 
Backflow preventer with Installation of potable water connections to 
 . atmos- water boilers. No high-hazard chemicals 
eric vent ; | à 
р ASSE 1012 x x __ = shall be introduced into the system using 
such devices. Designed to operate under con- 
tinuous pressure conditions. May discharge 
water. 
Backflow preventer with Installation of potable water connections to 
... е ы; water boilers. No high-hazard chemicals 
vent and pressure reduc- 1 1 1 
Mace p ASSE 1081 x x => o shall be introduced into the system using 
8 valve such devices. Designed to operate under con- 
tinuous pressure conditions. May discharge 
water. 
Chemical dispenser with | ANSI/CAN/ Shall be installed in accordance with 
integral backflow protec- | ASSE/IAPMO X — X — manufacturer's installation instructions with 
tion 1055 dedicated water supply whenever possible. 
Dual check backflow ASSE 1004 X x o = Installation does not include carbonated drink 
preventer dispensers. 
ჩამ იყი bar Koy Such devices are not for use under 
preventer wall hydrants, | ASSE 1053 X - X — lop ra 91000 ditions.’ 
Freeza tesistant continuous pressure conditions. 
Double Check Detector 
Fire Protection Backflow Horizontal unless otherwise listed. Access 
Prevention Assembly and clearance shall be in accordance with the 
(two independent check manufacturer’s instructions, and not less than 
valves with a parallel a 12 inch clearance at the bottom for mainte- 
detector assembly con- ASSE 1048 X X — — nance. May need platform/ladder for test and 
sisting of a water meter repair. Does not discharge water. Installation 
and a double check valve includes a fire protection system and is 
backflow prevention designed to operate under continuous pres- 
assembly and means for sure conditions. 
field testing) 
142 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 603.2 
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES, ASSEMBLIES, AND METHODS (continued) 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


DEGREE OF HAZARD 


POLLUTION CONTAMINATION 
DEVICE, ASSEMBLY, APPLICABLE (LOW HAZARD) (HIGH HAZARD) 23 
OR METHOD! STANDARDS BACK- BACK- BACK- BACK- ЧЗТАЕРАПОН 
SIPHONAGE | PRESSURE | SIPHONAGE | PRESSURE 

Double Check Valve Horizontal unless otherwise listed. Access and 
Backflow Prevention ASSE 1015; clearance shall be in accordance with the man- 
Assembly (two inde- AWWA C510; X X = = ufacturer's instructions, and not less than a 12 
pendent check valves CSA B64.5 or inch clearance at the bottom for maintenance. 
and means of field test- | CSA B64.5.1 May need platform/ladder for test and repair. 
ing) Does not discharge water. 
Freeze resistant sanitary ASSE 1057 x ИА x o Such devices are not for use under 
yard hydrants continuous pressure conditions. 
Hose connection back- ASSE 1052 x m x = Such devices are not for use under 
flow preventers continuous pressure conditions.” 
Hose connection vac- ASSE 1011 x m" x > Such devices are not for use under Cotitinuous 
uum breakers pressure conditions. No valve downstream.” 
Laboratory faucet back- Installation includes laboratory faucets. Such 
flow preventer ASSE 1035 X — X — devices are not for use under continuous 

pressure conditions. No valve downstream.* 
Pressure Vacuum Breaker 
Backflow Prevention Upright position. May have valves down- 
Assembly (loaded air ASSE 1020 or X = X u stream. Minimum of 12 inches above all 
inlet valve, internally CSA B64.1.2 downstream piping and flood-level rim of the 
loaded check valve and receptor. May discharge water. 
means for field testing) 
Reduced Pressure Detec- 
tor Fire Protection Back- 
flow Prevention Horizontal unless otherwise listed. Access 
Assembly (two independ- and clearance shall be in accordance with the 
ently acting loaded check manufacturer's instructions, and not less than 
valves, a differential pres- a 12 inch clearance at the bottom for mainte- 
sure relief valve, with a ASSE 1047 X X X X nance. May need platform/ladder for test and 
parallel detector assembly repair. May discharge water. 
consisting of a water Installation includes a fire protection system 
meter and a reduced-pres- and is designed to operate under continuous 
sure principle backflow pressure conditions. 
prevention assembly, and 
means for field testing) 
Reduced Pressure Princi- Horizontal unless otherwise listed. Access 
ple Backflow Prevention ASSE 1013; and clearance shall be in accordance with the 
Assembly (two independ- | A WWA C511; manufacturer’s instructions, and not less th 
ently acting loaded check 3 X X X X шасын Cue arse at ae ear 
valves, a differential pres- CSA B64.4 or a 12 inch clearance at the bottom for mainte- 
sure relief valve and CSA B64.4.1 nance. May need platform/ladder for test and 
means for field testing) repair. May discharge water. 
Spill-Resistant Pressure 
Vacuum Breaker (single Upright position. Minimum of 12 inches or 
check valve with air ASSE 1056 X — X — listed distance above all downstream piping 
inlet vent and means of and flood-level rim of receptor.? 
field testing) 
Vacuum breaker wall Installation includes wall hydrants and hose 
hydrants, hose bibbs, ASSE 1019 or x 1 x u bibbs. Such devices are not for use under con- 
freeze resistant, auto- CSA B64.2.1.1 tinuous pressure conditions (means of shutoff 
matic draining type downstream of device is prohibited).^? 


Notes: 


с თ & wn 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


See the description of devices and assemblies in this chapter. 
Installation in pit or vault requires previous approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Refer to the general and specific requirement for installation. 
Not to be subjected to operating pressure for more than 12 hours in a 24-hour period. 
For deck-mounted and equipment-mounted vacuum breaker, see Section 603.5.13. 

Shall be installed in accordance with Section 603.5.7. 


143 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


TABLE 603.3.1 


MINIMUM AIR GAPS FOR WATER DISTRIBUTION* 


WHERE NOT AFFECTED BY SIDEWALLS! 


WHERE AFFECTED BY SIDEWALLS? 


FIXTURES 
(inches) (inches) 
Effective openings? not greater than 4 of an inch in diameter 1 1% 
Effective openings? not greater than % of an inch in diameter 1% 2% 
Effective openings? not greater than 1 inch in diameter 2 3 


Effective openings? greater than 1 inch in diameter 


Two times the diameter of 
effective opening 


Three times the diameter of 
effective opening 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 
Notes: 


Sidewalls, ribs, or similar obstructions do not affect air gaps where spaced from the inside edge of the spout opening a distance exceeding three times the 


diameter of the effective opening for a single wall, or a distance exceeding four times the effective opening for two intersecting walls. 


N 


Vertical walls, ribs, or similar obstructions extending from the water surface to or above the horizontal plane of the spout opening other than specified in Foot- 


note 1 above. The effect of three or more such vertical walls or ribs has not been determined. In such cases, the air gap shall be measured from the top of the 
wall. 


სხა 


The effective opening shall be the minimum cross-sectional area at the seat of the control valve or the supply pipe or tubing that feeds the device or outlet. 


Where two or more lines supply one outlet, the effective opening shall be the sum of the cross-sectional areas of the individual supply lines or the area of the 


single outlet, whichever is smaller. 


> 


vacuums of 0 to 25 inches of mercury (85 kPa). 


144 


603.5.7 Outlets with Hose Attachments. Potable 
water outlets with hose attachments, other than water 
heater drains, boiler drains, and clothes washer connec- 
tions, shall be protected by a nonremovable hose bibb- 
type backflow preventer, a nonremovable hose bibb-type 
vacuum breaker, or by an atmospheric vacuum breaker 
installed not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the high- 
est point of usage located on the discharge side of the last 
valve. In climates where freezing temperatures occur, a 
listed self-draining frost-proof hose bibb with an integral 
backflow preventer or vacuum breaker shall be used. 


603.5.8 Water-Cooled Equipment. Water-cooled 
compressors, degreasers, or other water-cooled equip- 
ment shall be protected by a backflow preventer installed 
in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
Water-cooled equipment that produces backpressure 
shall be equipped with the appropriate protection. 


603.5.9 Aspirators. Water inlets to water-supplied 
aspirators shall be equipped with a vacuum breaker 
installed in accordance with its listing requirements and 
this chapter. The discharge shall drain through an air gap. 
Where the tailpiece of a fixture to receive the discharge 
of an aspirator is used, the air gap shall be located above 
the flood-level rim of the fixture. 


603.5.10 Steam or Hot Water Boilers. Potable water 
connections to steam or hot water boilers shall be pro- 
tected from backflow by a double check valve backflow 
prevention assembly, backflow preventer with interme- 
diate atmospheric vent and pressure reducing valve, or 
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assem- 
bly in accordance with Table 603.2. Where chemicals are 
introduced into the system a reduced pressure principle 
backflow prevention assembly shall be provided in 
accordance with Table 603.2. 


603.5.11 Nonpotable Water Piping. In cases where 
it is impractical to correct individual cross-connections 
on the domestic waterline, the line supplying such outlets 


Air gaps less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) shall be approved as a permanent part of a listed assembly that has been tested under actual backflow conditions with 


shall be considered a nonpotable water line. No drinking 
or domestic water outlets shall be connected to the non- 
potable waterline. Where possible, portions of the non- 
potable waterline shall be exposed, and exposed portions 
shall be properly identified in a manner satisfactory to 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Each outlet on the 
nonpotable waterline that is permitted to be used for 
drinking or domestic purposes shall be posted: *CAU- 
TION: NONPOTABLE WATER, DO NOT DRINK.” 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] An international symbol of a glass 
in a circle with a slash through it shall be provided sim- 
ilar to that shown in Figure 601. 


603.5.12 Beverage Dispensers. Potable water sup- 
ply to carbonated beverage dispensers shall be protected | 
by an air gap or a vented backflow preventer that com- 
plies with ASSE 1022. For carbonated beverage dis- 
pensers, piping material installed downstream of the 
backflow preventer shall not be affected by carbon diox- 
ide gas. Non-carbonated beverage dispensers, such as ice 
makers and coffee machines, shall be protected by an air 
gap or dual check backflow preventer that comply with 
ASSE 1032 or ASSE 1024. 


603.5.13 Deck-Mounted and Equipment- 
Mounted Vacuum Breakers. Deck-mounted or 
equipment-mounted vacuum breakers shall be installed 
in accordance with their listing and the manufacturer's 
installation instructions, with the critical level not less 
than 1 inch (25.4 mm) above the flood-level rim. 


603.5.14 Protection from Fire Systems. 


Note: Fire Protection Systems has not been adopted by 
the State Fire Marshal. This section cannot be adopted or 
enforced pursuant to California Health and Safety Code 
13114.7(a), which is being cited for reference. California 
Health and Safety Code 13114.7. 


(a) For the purposes of this section the following are 
definitions of class I and class II systems: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) American Water Works Association [A.W.W. A] 
Manual No. M-14 class 1 — Automatic fire 
sprinkler systems with direct connection from 
public water mains only; no pumps, tanks, or 
reservoirs; no physical connection from other 
water supplies; no antifreeze or additives of any 
kind; and all sprinkler drains discharging to the 
atmosphere or other safe outlets. 


(2) American Water Works Association [A.W.W. A] 
Manual No. M-14 class 2 — Automatic fire 
sprinkler systems which are the same as class 
1, except that booster pumps may be installed 
in the connections from the street mains. 


(b) Automatic fire sprinkler systems described in subdi- 
vision (a) shall not require any backflow protection 
equipment at the service connection other than 
required by standards for those systems contained 
in the publication of the National Fire Protection 
Association entitled "Installation of Sprinkler Sys- 
tems” [NFPA Pamphlet No. 13, 1980 edition]. 


603.5.14.1 Fire Department Connection. 
Where fire protection systems supplied from a 
potable water system include a fire department 
(siamese) connection that is located less than 1700 
feet (518.2 m) from a nonpotable water source that 
is capable of being used by the fire department as a 
secondary water supply, the potable water supply 
shall be protected by one of the following: 


(1) Reduced pressure principle backflow preven- 
tion assembly (RP) 


(2) Reduced pressure detector fire protection back- 
flow prevention assembly 


Nonpotable water sources include fire depart- 
ment vehicles carrying water of questionable quality 
or water that is treated with antifreeze, corrosion 
inhibitors, or extinguishing agents. 
603.5.14.2 Chemicals. Where antifreeze, corro- 
sion inhibitors, or other chemicals are added to a fire 
protection system supplied from a potable water 
supply, the potable water system shall be protected 
by one of the following: 


(1) Reduced pressure principle backflow preven- 
tion assembly (RP) 


(2) Reduced pressure detector fire protection back- 
flow prevention assembly 


603.5.14.3 Hydraulic Design. Where a backflow 
device is installed in the potable water supply to a 
fire protection system, the hydraulic design of the 
system shall account for the pressure drop through 
the backflow device. Where such devices are retro- 
fitted for an existing fire protection system, the 
hydraulics of the sprinkler system design shall be 
checked to verify that there will be sufficient water 
pressure available for satisfactory operation of the 
fire sprinklers. 


603.5.15 Health Care or Laboratory Areas. Vac- 
uum breakers for washer-hose bedpans shall be located 
not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) above the floor. Hose con- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


nections in health care or laboratory areas shall be not 
less than 6 feet (1829 mm) above the floor. 


603.5.16 Special Equipment. Portable cleaning 
equipment and dental vacuum pumps shall be protected 
from backflow by an air gap, an atmospheric vacuum 
breaker, a spill-resistant vacuum breaker, or a reduced 
pressure principle backflow preventer. 


603.5.17 Potable Water Outlets and Valves. 
Potable water outlets, freeze-proof yard hydrants, com- 
bination stop-and-waste valves, or other fixtures that 
incorporate a stop and waste feature that drains into the 
ground shall not be installed underground. 


603.5.18 Pure Water Process Systems. The water 
supply to a pure water process system, such as dialysis 
water systems, semiconductor washing systems, and sim- 
ilar process piping systems, shall be protected from back- 
pressure and backsiphonage by a reduced-pressure 
principle backflow preventer. 


603.5.18.1 Dialysis Water Systems. The indi- 
vidual connections of the dialysis related equipment 
to the dialysis pure water system shall not require 
additional backflow protection. 
603.5.19 Garbage Can Washers. Where garbage can 
washers are connected to a potable water supply system, 


the connection shall be protected against backflow in 

accordance with Table 603.2. 

603.5.20 Plumbing Fixture Fittings. Plumbing fix- 

ture fittings with integral backflow protection shall com- 

ply with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 

603.5.21 Swimming Pools, Spas, and Hot Tubs. 

Potable water supply to swimming pools, spas, and hot 

tubs shall be protected by an air gap or a reduced pressure 

principle backflow preventer in accordance with the fol- 
lowing: 

(1) The unit is equipped with a submerged fill line. 

(2) The potable water supply is directly connected to the 
unit circulation system. 

603.5.22 Chemical Dispensers. The water supply to 

chemical dispensers shall be protected against backflow 

by one of the following: 

(1) The chemical dispenser shall comply with 
ANSI/CAN/ASSE/IAPMO 1055. Where an installa- 
tion involves a water source coming from a faucet 
with an integrated vacuum breaker device, a pressure 
bleed device conforming to IAPMO PS 104 shall be 
used to protect the vacuum breaker device. 


(2) Water supply shall be protected by one of the fol- 
lowing methods: 


(a) Air gap 
(b) Atmospheric vacuum breaker (AVB) 


(c) Pressure vacuum breaker backflow prevention 
assembly (PVB) 

(d) Spill-resistant pressure vacuum breaker (SVB) 

(e) Reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention 
assembly (RP) 


М7 


145 


< 


< 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


604.0 Materials. 


604.1 Pipe, Tube, and Fittings. Pipe, tube, fittings, sol- 
vent cement, thread sealants, solders, and flux used in potable 
water systems intended to supply drinking water shall com- 
| ply with NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. Where pipe fittings and valves 
are made from copper alloys containing more than 15 percent 
zinc by weight and are used in plastic piping systems, they 
shall be resistant to dezincification and stress corrosion crack- 
| ing in compliance with NSF/ANSI 14. 
Materials used in the water supply system, except valves 
and similar devices, shall be of a like material, except where 
otherwise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


146 


Materials for building water piping and building supply 
piping shall comply with the applicable standards referenced 
in Table 604.1. 


Exception: [OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] Use of CPVC is not per- 
|| mitted for potable water applications. 


604.1.1 Local Authority to Approve CPVC Pipe 
Within Residential Buildings Under Specified Con- 
ditions. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] The local responsible build- 
ing official of any city, county, or city and county, shall 
authorize by permit the use of CPVC for hot and cold water 
distribution systems within the interior of residential build- 
ings provided all of the following conditions are satisfied: 


(a) 


(b) 


(c) 


(d) 


(е) 


Permit Conditions. Any building permit issued pur- 
suant to Section 604.1.1 shall be conditioned on 
compliance with the mitigation measures set forth 
in this section. 


Approved Materials. Only CPVC plumbing mate- 
rial listed as an approved material and installed in 
accordance with this code may be used. 


Installation and Use. Any installation and use of 
CPVC plumbing material pursuant to this section 
shall comply with all applicable requirements of this 
code and the manufacturer 5 installation instructions. 


Certification of Compliance. Prior to issuing a 
building permit pursuant to Section 604.1.1, the 
building official shall require as part of the permit- 
ting process that the contractor, or the appropriate 
plumbing subcontractors, provide written certifica- 
tion: (1) that is required in subdivision (e), and (2) 
that he or she will comply with the flushing proce- 
dures and worker safety measures of this code and 
the manufacturer § installation instructions. 


Worker Safety. Any contractor applying for a build- 
ing permit that includes the use of CPVC plumbing 
materials authorized pursuant to this section shall 
include in the permit application a signed written 
certification stating that: 


(1) They are aware of the health and safety hazards 
associated with CPVC plumbing installations; 


(2) They have included in their Injury and Illness 
Prevention Plan the hazards associated with 
CPVC plumbing pipe installations; and 

(3) The worker safety training elements of their 
Injury and Illness Prevention Plan meet the 
Department of Industrial Relations guidelines. 


თ 


(2) 


(h) 


Findings of Compliance. The building official shall 
not give final permit approval of any CPVC plumbing 
materials installed pursuant to Section 604.1.1 unless 
he or she finds that the material has been installed in 
compliance with the requirements of this code and the 
manufacturer 5 installation instructions. 


Penalties. Any contractor or subcontractor found to 
have failed to comply with the flushing, ventilation, 
and glove requirements of this code and the manu- 
facturer 5 installation instructions shall be subject 
to the penalties in Health and Safety Code, Division 
13, Part 1.5, Chapter 6 (Section 17995 et seq.). In 
addition, if during the conduct of any building 
inspection the building official finds that the venti- 
lation and glove requirements of this code, are being 
violated, such building officials shall cite the con- 
tractor or subcontractor for that violation. 


Special Requirements for CPVC Installation 
within Residential Structures. In addition to the 
other requirements in the California Plumbing 
Code, all installations of CPVC pipe within resi- 
dential structures shall meet the following: 


() Flushing Procedures. All installations of 
CPVC pipe within residential structures shall 
be flushed twice over a period of at least one 
(1) week. The pipe system shall be first flushed 
for at least 10 minutes and then filled and 
allowed to stand for no less than 1 week, after 
which all the branches of the pipe system must 
be flushed long enough to fully empty the con- 
tained volume. At the time of the fill, each fix- 
ture shall have a removable tag applied stating: 


"This new plumbing system was first filled on (date) 
by (name). The California Department of Housing 
and Community Development requires that the sys- 
tem be flushed after standing at least one week after 
the fill date specified above. If the system is used ear- 
lier than one week after the fill date, the water must 
be allowed to run for at least two minutes prior to use 
for human consumption. This tag may not be removed 
prior to flushing, except by the homeowner." 


(ii) Worker Safety Measures. Mechanical ventila- 
tion sufficient to maintain exposures below the 
relevant exposure limits established by state 
regulation shall be provided in enclosed spaces. 
This ventilation shall be directed at the breath- 
ing zone of the worker installing the pipe. 
Where mechanical ventilation is not practical, 
respirators, suitable for organic vapors, shall 
be used. For the purpose of this subdivision, an 
enclosed space is defined as: 

(1) A space less than 100 square feet of floor 
area under a ceiling with a height of 10 feet 
or less, and which does not have openings 
(consisting of doors, windows, or unfin- 
ished walls) on at least two sides; 

(2) Crawl spaces having a height of less than 
three feet; 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(3) Enclosed attics that have a roof and ceil- 
ing; or 

(4) Trenches having a depth greater than 24 
inches. 


Installers of CPVC pipe within residential struc- 
tures shall use non-latex thin gauge (4 millime- 
ters) nitrile gloves, or other gloves providing an 
equivalent or better degree of protection during 
the installation of the CPVC plumbing system. 
Gloves shall be provided to all workers by the 
contractor, or plumbing subcontractor, and shall 
be replaced upon contamination by cements. 


604.1.2 PEX. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] All installations of 
PEX pipe where it is the initial plumbing piping installed 
in new construction shall be flushed twice over a period 
of at least one week. The pipe system shall be first flushed 
for at least 10 minutes and then filled and allowed to 
stand for no less than 1 week, after which all the 
branches of the pipe system must be flushed long enough 
to fully empty the contained volume. This provision shall 
not apply to the installation of PEX pipe where it 
replaces an existing pipe system of any material. 


(1) At the time of fill, each fixture shall have a remov- 
able tag applied stating: 


(a) "This new plumbing system was first filled and 
flushed on (date) by 
(name). The State of California requires that the 
system be flushed after standing at least one 
week after the fill date specified above. If this 
system is used earlier than one week after the 
fill date, the water must be allowed to run for at 
least two minutes prior to use for human con- 
sumption. This tag may not be removed prior to 
the completion of the required second flushing, 
except by the building owner or occupant." 


(2) Prior to issuing a building permit to install PEX 
pipe, the building official shall require as part of the 
permitting process that the contractor, or the appro- 
priate plumbing subcontractors, provide written cer- 
tification that he or she will comply with the flushing 
procedures set forth in the code. 


(3) The building official shall not give final permit 
approval of any PEX plumbing installation unless he 
or she finds that the material has been installed in 
compliance with the requirements of the code, includ- 
ing the requirements to flush and tag the systems. 


(4) Any contractor or subcontractor found to have 
failed to comply with the PEX flushing requirements 
shall be subject to the penalties in Health and Safety 
Code, Division 13, Part 1.5, Chapter 6 (Section 
17995, et seq.). 

604.2 Lead Content. The maximum allowable lead content 
in pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, and fixtures intended 
to convey or dispense water for human consumption shall be 
not more than a weighted average of 0.25 percent with respect 
to the wetted surfaces of pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


and fixtures. For solder and flux, the lead content shall be not 
more than 0.2 percent where used in piping systems that con- 
vey or dispense water for human consumption. 


Note: See Sections 116875 and 116876 of the Health and 
Safety Code for the maximum lead content of pipes, pipe or 
plumbing fittings, or fixtures intended to convey or dispense 
water for human consumption. 

Exceptions: 

(1) Pipes, pipe fittings, plumbing fittings, fixtures, or back- 
flow preventers used for nonpotable services such as 
manufacturing, industrial processing, irrigation, outdoor 
watering, or any other uses where the water is not used 
for human consumption. 


(2) Flush valves, fill valves, flushometer valves, tub fillers, 
shower valves, service saddles, or water distribution 
main gate valves that are 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter 
or larger. 


604.2.1 Lead Content of Water Supply Pipe and 
Fittings. Pipes, pipe fittings, valves, and faucets utilized 
in the water supply system for non-drinking water appli- 
cations shall have a maximum of 8 percent lead content. 


604.3 Copper or Copper Alloy Tube. Copper or copper 
alloy tube for water piping shall have a weight of not less than 
Type L. 


Exception: Type M copper or copper alloy tubing shall be 
permitted to be used for water piping where piping is above- 
ground in, or on, a building or underground outside of struc- 
tures. 


604.4 Hard-Drawn Copper or Copper Alloy Tubing. 
Hard-drawn copper or copper alloy tubing for water supply 
and distribution in addition to the required incised marking 
shall be marked in accordance with ASTM B88. The colors 
shall be: Type K, green; Type L, blue; and Type M, red. 
604.5 Flexible Connectors. Flexible water connectors 
shall be installed in accessible locations, and where under con- | 
tinuous pressure shall comply with ASME A112.18.6/CSA 
B125.6. Flexible water connectors with an excess flow shut- 
off device shall comply with CSA B125.5/[APMO Z600. 
604.6 Cast-Iron Fittings. Cast-iron fittings up to and 
including 2 inches (50 mm) in size, where used in connection 
with potable water piping, shall be galvanized. 

604.7 Malleable Iron Fittings. Malleable iron water fit- 
tings shall be galvanized. 

604.8 Previously Used Piping and Tubing. Piping and 
tubing that has previously been used for a purpose other than 
for potable water systems shall not be used. 

604.9 Epoxy Coating. The epoxy coating used on exist- 
ing, underground steel building supply piping shall comply 
with NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 and AWWA C210. 

604.10 Plastic Materials. Approved plastic materials shall 
be permitted to be used in building supply piping, provided 
that where metal building supply piping is used for electrical 
grounding purposes, replacement piping, therefore, shall be of 
like materials. 


147 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


TABLE 604.1 
MATERIALS FOR BUILDING SUPPLY AND WATER DISTRIBUTION PIPING AND FITTINGS 


ASTM A554, ASTM A778 


WATER 
BUILDING SUPPLY REFERENCED REFERENCED 
MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION PIPE 
PIPE AND FITTINGS | “AND FITTINGS STANDARD(S) PIPE STANDARD(S) FITTINGS 
Copper and Copper ASME B16.15, ASME B16.18, 
Alloys ASTM 842, ASTM B43, ASME B16.22, ASME B16.26, 
x x ASTM B75, ASTM B88, ASME B16.50?, ASME B16.51, 
ASTM B135, ASTM B251, ASSE 1061, ASTM F3226, 
ASTM B302, ASTM B447 AWWA C606, CSA B242, 
IAPMO PS 53, IAPMO PS 117 
CPVC ASSE 1061, ASTM D2846, 
S > ASTM 02846, ASTM L441, ASTM F437, ASTM F438, 
ASTM F442, CSA B137.6 ASTM F439, ASTM F1970, 

I CSA B137.6, IAPMO PS 53 
CPVC-AL-CPVC X X ASTM F2855 ASTM D2846 
Ductile-Iron ASME B164, AWWA C110, 

| X X AWWA C151 AWWA C153, AWWA C606, 

CSA B242, IAPMO PS 53 
Galvanized Steel AWWA C606, CSA B242, 
| X X ASTM A53 мов 
Malleable Iron Ж z Е ASME B16.3, AWWA C606, 
IAPMO PS 53 
PE ASTM D2239, ASTM D2737, | ASTM D2609, ASTM D2683, 
x! = ASTM D3035, AWWA C901, | ASTM D3261, ASTM F1055, 
CSA B137.1 CSA B137.1 
PE-AL-PE ASTM F1282, ASTM F1974, 
X X ASTM F1282, CSA B137.9 ТЕЕ 
PE-RT ASSE 1061, ASTM D3261, 
ASTM F1055, ASTM F1807, 
X X ASTM F2769, CSA B137.18 ASTM F2098, ASTM F2159, 
ASTM F2735, ASTM F2769, 
CSA B137.18 
PEX?4 ASSE 1061, ASTM F877, 
ASTM F1807, ASTM F1960 
ASTM F876 à | 
X X | , ASTM F2080, ASTM F2159, 
СЭ QUEUNT ASTM F2735, ASTM F3347, 
ASTM F3348, CSA B137.5 
PEX-AL-PEX? ASTM F1281, ASTM F1974, 
POT NEEL CO BIS TY ASTM F2434, CSA B137.10 
PP ASTM F2389, CSA B137.11 ASTM F2389, CSA B137.11 
PVC 
ASTM Dives ASTM РЭ: ASTM D2464, ASTM D2466, 
x! = ANAAO ASTM D2467, ASTM F1970, 

| AWWA C907, ТАРМО PS 53 

Stainless Steel T a ASTM A269, ASTM A312, ASTM F3226, CSA B242, 


IAPMO PS 53, IAPMO PS 117 


Notes: 


! For building supply or exterior cold-water applications, not for water distribution piping. 


? For brazed fittings only. 


ll გ [AGR & DPH] When PEX tubing is placed in soil and is used in potable water systems intended to supply drinking water to fixtures or appliances, the tubing 


or piping shall be sleeved with a material approved for potable water use in soil or other material that is impermeable to solvents or petroleum products. 
11 # [AGR & DPH] PEX tubing shall meet or exceed the requirements of ASTM F876-2015a or an equivalent or more stringent standard when used in contin- 
uously recirculating hot water systems and the PEX tubing is exposed to the hot water 100% of the time. 


| 5 [For BSC, 054-55, HCD 1 & HCD 2] The use of PEX-AL-PEX in potable water supply systems is not adopted. 


148 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Exception: Where a grounding system acceptable to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction is installed, inspected, and 
approved, the metallic pipe shall be permitted to be replaced 
with nonmetallic pipe. 


604.10.1 Tracer Wire. Plastic materials for building 
supply piping outside underground shall have an electri- 
cally continuous corrosion-resistant blue insulated cop- 
per tracer wire, or other approved conductor installed 
adjacent to the piping. Access shall be provided to the 
tracer wire, or the tracer wire shall terminate above- 
ground at each end of the nonmetallic piping. The tracer 
wire size shall be not less than 14 AWG, and the insula- 
tion type shall be suitable for direct burial. 


604.11 Solder. Solder shall comply with the requirements of 
Section 604.2. 


604.12 Flexible Corrugated Connectors. Flexible cor- 
rugated connectors of copper, copper alloy, or stainless steel 
shall be limited to the following connector lengths: 


(1) Fixture Connectors – 30 inches (762 mm) 
(2) Washing Machine Connectors — 72 inches (1829 mm) 


(3) Dishwasher and Icemaker Connectors — 120 inches 
(3048 mm) 


604.13 Water Heater Connectors. Flexible metallic (cop- 
per and stainless steel), reinforced flexible, braided stainless 
steel, or polymer braided with EPDM core connectors that 
connect a water heater to the piping system shall comply with 
ASME A112.18.6/CSA B125.6. Copper, copper alloy, or 
stainless steel flexible connectors shall not exceed 24 inches 
(610 mm). PEX, PEX-AL-PEX, PE-AL-PE, or PE-RT tubing 
shall not be installed within the first 18 inches (457 mm) of 
piping connected to a water heater. [BSC, HCD 1 & HCD 2] 
PEX-AL-PEX is not adopted for use in potable water supply 
and distribution systems. 


605.0 Joints and Connections. 

605.1 Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe, Tubing, and 
Joints. Joining methods for copper or copper alloy pipe, tub- 
ing, and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions and shall comply with 
Section 605.1.1 through Section 605.1.5. 


605.1.1 Brazed Joints. Brazed joints between copper 
or copper alloy pipe or tubing and fittings shall be made 
with brazing alloys having a liquid temperature above 
1000°F (538°C). The joint surfaces to be brazed shall be 
cleaned bright by either manual or mechanical means. 
Tubing shall be cut square and reamed to full inside 
diameter. Brazing flux shall be applied to the joint sur- 
faces where required by manufacturer's recommenda- 
tion. Brazing filler metal shall conform to AWS A5.8 and 
shall be applied at the point where the pipe or tubing 
enters the socket of the fitting. 


605.1.2 Flared Joints. Flared joints for soft copper or 
copper alloy water tubing shall be made with fittings that 
comply with the applicable standards referenced in Table 
604.1. Pipe or tubing shall be cut square using an appro- 
priate tubing cutter. The tubing shall be reamed to full 
inside diameter, resized to round, and expanded with a 
proper flaring tool. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


605.1.3 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
include, but are not limited to, compression, flanged, 
grooved, pressed, and push fit fittings. 


605.1.3.1 Mechanically Formed Tee Fittings. 
Mechanically formed tee fittings shall have extracted 
collars that shall be formed in a continuous operation 
consisting of drilling a pilot hole and drawing out the 
pipe or tube surface to form a collar having a height 
not less than three times the thickness of the branch 
tube wall. The branch pipe or tube shall be notched 
to conform to the inner curve of the run pipe or tube 
and shall have two dimple depth stops to ensure that 
penetration of the branch pipe or tube into the collar 
is of a depth for brazing and that the branch pipe or 
tube does not obstruct the flow in the main line pipe 
or tube. Dimple depth stops shall be in line with the 
run of the pipe or tube. The second dimple shall be 4 
of an inch (6.4 mm) above the first and shall serve 
as a visual point of inspection. Fittings and joints 
shall be made by brazing. Soldered joints shall not 
be permitted. 


605.1.3.2 Press-Connect Fittings. Press-connect 
fittings for copper or copper alloy pipe or tubing shall 
have an elastomeric o-ring that forms the joint. The 
pipe or tubing shall be fully inserted into the fitting, 
and the pipe or tubing marked at the shoulder of the 
fitting. Pipe or tubing shall be cut square, chamfered, 
and reamed to full inside diameter. The fitting align- 
ment shall be checked against the mark on the pipe or 
tubing to ensure the pipe or tubing is inserted into the 
fitting. The joint shall be pressed using the tool rec- 
ommended by the manufacturer. 


605.1.3.3 Push Fit Fittings. Removable and non- 
removable push fit fittings for copper or copper 
alloy tubing or pipe that employ quick assembly 
push fit connectors shall comply with ASSE 1061. 
Push fit fittings for copper or copper alloy pipe or 
tubing shall have an approved elastomeric o-ring 
that forms the joint. Pipe or tubing shall be cut 
square, chamfered, and reamed to full inside diam- 
eter. The tubing shall be fully inserted into the fit- 
ting, and the tubing marked at the shoulder of the 
fitting. The fitting alignment shall be checked 
against the mark on the tubing to ensure the tubing 
is inserted into the fitting and gripping mechanism 
has engaged on the pipe. 


605.1.4 Soldered Joints. Soldered joints between cop- 
per or copper alloy pipe or tubing and fittings shall be 
made in accordance with ASTM B828 with the following 
sequence of joint preparation and operation as follows: 
measuring and cutting, reaming, cleaning, fluxing, assem- 
bly and support, heating, applying the solder, cooling and 
cleaning. Pipe or tubing shall be cut square and reamed to 
the full inside diameter including the removal of burrs on 
the outside of the pipe or tubing. Surfaces to be joined 
shall be cleaned bright by manual or mechanical means. 
Flux shall be applied to pipe or tubing and fittings and 
shall conform to ASTM B813, and shall become noncor- 
rosive and nontoxic after soldering. Insert pipe or tubing 


149 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


into the base of the fitting and remove excess flux. Pipe 
or tubing and fitting shall be supported to ensure a uni- 
form capillary space around the joint. Heat shall be 
applied using an air or fuel torch with the flame perpen- 
dicular to the pipe or tubing using acetylene or an LP gas. 
Preheating shall depend on the size of the joint. The flame 
shall be moved to the fitting cup and alternate between 
the pipe or tubing and fitting. Solder conforming to 
ASTM B32 shall be applied to the joint surfaces until cap- 
illary action draws the molten solder into the cup. Solder 
and fluxes with a lead content that exceeds 0.2 percent 
shall be prohibited in piping systems conveying potable 
water. Joint surfaces shall not be disturbed until cool and 
any remaining flux residue shall be cleaned. 


605.1.5 Threaded Joints. Threaded joints for copper 
or copper alloy pipe shall be made with pipe threads that 
comply with ASME B1.20.1. Thread sealant tape or 
compound shall be applied only on male threads, and 
such material shall be of approved types, insoluble in 
water, and nontoxic. 


605.2 CPVC Plastic Pipe and Joints. CPVC plastic pipe 
and fitting joining methods shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall 
comply with Section 605.2.1 through Section 605.2.3. 


605.2.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
include compression, flanged, grooved and push fit fit- 
tings. 
605.2.1.1 Push Fit Fittings. Removable and non- 
removable push fit fittings that employ a quick 
assembly push fit connector shall comply with 
ASSE 1061. 


605.2.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement joints 
for CPVC pipe and fittings shall be clean from dirt and 
moisture. Solvent cements shall comply with ASTM F493, 
requiring the use of a primer shall be orange in color. The 
primer shall be colored and shall comply with ASTM F656. 
Listed solvent cement that complies with ASTM F493 and 
that does not require the use of primers, yellow, green, or 
red in color, shall be permitted for pipe and fittings that 
comply with ASTM 02846, ” of an inch (15 mm) through 
2 inches (50 mm) in diameter or ASTM F442, # of an inch 
(15 mm) through 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter. Apply 
primer where required inside the fitting and to the depth of 
the fitting on pipe. Apply liberal coat of cement to the out- 
side surface of pipe to depth of fitting and inside of fitting. 
Place pipe inside fitting to forcefully bottom the pipe in the 
socket and hold together until joint is set. [HCD 1 & HCD 
2] Low VOC One-Step Cement that does not require the 
use of primer shall be utilized with CPVC pipe and fit- 
tings, manufactured in accordance with ASTM D2846. 


605.2.3 Threaded Joints. Threads shall comply with 
ASME B1.20.1. A minimum of Schedule 80 shall be per- 
mitted to be threaded; however, the pressure rating shall 
be reduced by 50 percent. The use of molded fittings 
shall not result in a 50 percent reduction in the pressure 
rating of the pipe provided that the molded fittings shall 
be fabricated so that the wall thickness of the material is 
maintained at the threads. Thread sealant compound that 
is compatible with the pipe and fitting, insoluble in water, 


150 


and nontoxic shall be applied to male threads. Caution 
shall be used during assembly to prevent over tightening 
of the CPVC components once the thread sealant has 
been applied. Female CPVC threaded fittings shall be 
used with plastic male threads only. 


605.3 CPVC/AL/CPVC Plastic Pipe and Joints. Chlo- 
rinated polyvinyl chloride/aluminum/chlorinated polyvinyl 
chloride (CPVC/AL/CPVC) plastic pipe and fitting joining 
methods shall be installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions and shall comply with Section 
605.3.1 or Section 605.3.2. 


605.3.1 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement 
joints for CPVC/AL/CPVC pipe and fittings shall be 
clean from dirt and moisture. Solvent cements that com- 
ply with ASTM F493, requiring the use of a primer shall 
be orange in color. The primer shall be colored and shall 
comply with ASTM F656. Listed solvent cement that 
complies with ASTM F493 and that does not require the 
use of primers, yellow in color, shall be permitted to join 
pipe that comply with ASTM F2855 and fittings that 
comply with ASTM D2846, !^ of an inch (15 mm) 
through 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter. Apply primer 
where required inside the fitting and to the depth of the 
fitting on pipe. Apply liberal coat of cement to the out- 
side surface of pipe to depth of fitting and inside of fit- 
ting. Place pipe inside fitting to forcefully bottom the 
pipe in the socket and hold together until joint is set. 


605.3.2 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
include flanged, grooved, and push fit fittings. 


605.3.2.1 Push Fit Fittings. Removable and non- 
removable push fit fittings that employ a quick 
assembly push fit connector shall comply with 
ASSE 1061. 


605.4 Ductile Iron Pipe and Joints. Ductile iron pipe 
and fitting joining methods shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall 
comply with Section 605.4.1 or Section 605.42. 


605.4.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints for 
ductile iron pipe and fittings shall consist of a bell that is 
cast integrally with the pipe or fitting and provided with 
an exterior flange having bolt holes and a socket with 
annular recesses for the sealing gasket and the plain end 
of the pipe or fitting. The elastomeric gasket shall com- 
ply with AWWA C111. Lubricant recommended for 
potable water application by the pipe manufacturer shall 
be applied to the gasket and plain end of the pipe. 


605.4.2 Push-On Joints. Push-on joints for ductile 
iron pipe and fittings shall consist of a single elastomeric 
gasket that shall be assembled by positioning the elas- 
tomeric gasket in an annular recess in the pipe or fitting 
socket and forcing the plain end of the pipe or fitting into 
the socket. The plain end shall compress the elastomeric 
gasket to form a positive seal and shall be designed so 
that the elastomeric gasket shall be locked in place 
against displacement. The elastomeric gasket shall com- 
ply with AWWA C111. Lubricant recommended for 
potable water application by the pipe manufacturer shall 
be applied to the gasket and plain end of the pipe. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


605.5 Galvanized Steel Pipe and Joints. Galvanized 
steel pipe and fitting joining methods shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 605.5.1 or Section 605.5.2. 


605.5.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be made with an approved and listed elastomeric gasket. 


605.5.2 Threaded Joints. Threaded joints shall be 
made with pipe threads that comply with ASME B1.20.1. 
Thread sealant tape or compound shall be applied only 
on male threads, and such material shall be of approved 
types, insoluble in water, and nontoxic. 


605.6 PE Plastic Pipe/Tubing and Joints. PE plastic 
pipe or tubing and fitting joining methods shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 605.6.1 or Section 605.6.2. 


605.6.1 Heat-Fusion Joints. Heat-fusion joints between 
PE pipe or tubing and fittings shall be assembled in accor- 
dance with Section 605.6.1.1 through Section 605.6.1.3 
using butt, socket, or electro-fusion heat methods. 


605.6.1.1 Butt-Fusion Joints. Butt-fusion joints 
shall be made in accordance with ASTM F2620. 
Joints shall be made by heating the squared ends of 
two pipes, pipe and fitting, or two fittings by hold- 
ing ends against a heated element. The heated ele- 
ment shall be removed where the proper melt is 
obtained and joined ends shall be placed together 
with applied force. 


605.6.1.2 Electro-Fusion Joints. Electro-fusion 
joints shall be heated internally by a conductor at the 
interface of the joint. Align and restrain fitting to 
pipe to prevent movement and apply electric current 
to the fitting. Turn off the current when the proper 
time has elapsed to heat the joint. The joint shall fuse 
together and remain undisturbed until cool. 


605.6.1.3 Socket-Fusion Joints. Socket-fusion 
joints shall be made in accordance with ASTM 
F2620. Joints shall be made by simultaneously heat- 
ing the outside surface of a pipe end and the inside of 
a fitting socket. Where the proper melt is obtained, 
the pipe and fitting shall be joined by inserting one 
into the other with applied force. The joint shall fuse 
together and remain undisturbed until cool. 


605.6.2 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints 
between PE pipe or tubing and fittings shall include 
insert and mechanical compression fittings that provide 
a pressure seal resistance to pullout. Joints for insert fit- 
tings shall be made by cutting the pipe square, using a 
cutter designed for plastic piping, and removal of sharp 
edges. Two stainless steel clamps shall be placed over 
the end of the pipe. Fittings shall be checked for proper 
size based on the diameter of the pipe. The end of pipe 
shall be placed over the barbed insert fitting, making con- 
tact with the fitting shoulder. Clamps shall be positioned 
equal to 180 degrees (3.14 rad) apart and shall be tight- 
ened to provide a leak tight joint. Compression type cou- 
plings and fittings shall be permitted for use in joining 
PE piping and tubing. Stiffeners that extend beyond the 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


clamp or nut shall be prohibited. Bends shall be not less 
than 30 pipe diameters, or the coil radius where bending 
with the coil. Bends shall not be permitted closer than 10 
pipe diameters of a fitting or valve. Mechanical joints 
shall be designed for their intended use. 


605.7 PE-AL-PE Plastic Pipe/Tubing and Joints. PE- 
AL-PE plastic pipe or tubing and fitting joining methods shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installa- 
tion instructions and shall comply with Section 605.7.1 and 
Section 605.7.1.1. 


605.7.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints for PE- 
AL-PE pipe or tubing and fittings shall be either of the 
metal insert fittings with a split ring and compression nut 
or metal insert fittings with copper crimp rings. Metal 
insert fittings shall comply with ASTM F1974. Crimp 
insert fittings shall be joined to the pipe by placing the 
copper crimp ring around the outer circumference of the 
pipe, forcing the pipe material into the space formed by 
the ribs on the fitting until the pipe contacts the shoulder 
of the fitting. The crimp ring shall then be positioned on 
the pipe so the edge of the crimp ring is % of an inch (3.2 
mm) to М of an inch (6.4 mm) from the end of the pipe. 
The jaws of the crimping tool shall be centered over the 
crimp ring and tool perpendicular to the barb. The jaws 
shall be closed around the crimp ring and shall not be 
crimped more than once. 


605.7.1.1 Compression Joints. Compression 
joints for PE-AL-PE pipe or tubing and fittings shall 
be joined through the compression of a split ring, by 
a compression nut around the circumference of the 
pipe. The compression nut and split ring shall be 
placed around the pipe. The ribbed end of the fitting 
shall be inserted into the pipe until the pipe contacts 
the shoulder of the fitting. Position and compress the 
split ring by tightening the compression nut onto the 
insert fitting. 


605.8 PE-RT. Polyethylene of raised temperature (PE-RT) 
tubing and fitting joining methods and shall comply with Sec- 
tion 605.8.1. 


605.8.1 Mechanical Joints. Fittings for PE-RT tub- 
ing shall comply with the applicable standards listed in 
Table 604.1. Mechanical joints for PE-RT tubing shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s instal- 
lation instructions. 


605.9 PEX Plastic Tubing and Joints. PEX plastic tub- 
ing and fitting joining methods shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and 
shall comply with Section 605.9.1 through Section 605.9.3. 


All PEX pipe installed in California must provide at least 
30-day UV protection. [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Instal- 
lation and use of PEX tubing shall be in accordance with 
manufacturer 5 standards. PEX piping shall not be used for 
any application that would result in noncompliance with any 
provisions of the California Building Standards Code. 


605.9.1 Fittings. Fittings for PEX tubing shall comply 
with the applicable standards referenced in Table 604.1. 
PEX tubing that complies with ASTM F876 shall be 
marked with the applicable standard designation for the 


151 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


fittings, specified by the tubing manufacturer for use with 
the tubing. Brass fittings used with PEX tubing shall meet 
II or exceed NSF/ANSI 14 standards to prevent dezincifi- 
cation and stress crack corrosion. [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 
4 & 5] Installation and use of PEX tubing shall be in 
accordance with manufacturer 5 standards. PEX piping 
shall not be used for any application that would result in 
noncompliance with any provisions of the California 
Building Standards Code. 
605.9.2 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instal- 
lation instructions. 


605.9.3 Push Fit Fittings. Removable and nonre- 
movable push fit fittings that employ a quick assembly 
push fit connector shall comply with ASSE 1061. 


605.10 PEX-AL-PEX Plastic Tubing and Joints. PEX- 
AL-PEX plastic pipe or tubing and fitting joining methods 
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions and shall comply with Section 
605.10.1 and Section 605.10.1.1. 


|| [BSC, DSA-SS, HCD 1 & HCD 2] PEX-AL-PEX is not 
adopted for use in potable water supply and distribution sys- 
tems. 
605.10.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints 
between PEX-AL-PEX tubing and fittings shall include 
mechanical and compression type fittings and insert fit- 
tings with a crimping ring. Insert fittings utilizing a 
crimping ring shall comply with ASTM F1974 or ASTM 
F2434. Crimp joints for crimp insert fittings shall be 
joined to PEX-AL-PEX pipe by the compression of a 
crimp ring around the outer circumference of the pipe, 
forcing the pipe material into annular spaces formed by 
ribs on the fitting. 


[BSC] PEX-AL-PEX is not adopted for use in potable 
water supply and distribution systems. 


605.10.1.1 Compression Joints. Compression 
joints shall include compression insert fittings and 
shall be joined to PEX-AL-PEX pipe through the 
compression of a split ring or compression nut 
around the outer circumference of the pipe, forcing 
the pipe material into the annular space formed by 
the ribs on the fitting. 


[BSC] PEX-AL-PEX is not adopted for use in 
potable water supply and distribution systems. 


605.11 Polypropylene (PP) Piping and Joints. PP pipe 
and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions and shall comply with Sec- 
tion 605.11.1 through Section 605.11.3. 


605.11.1 Heat-Fusion Joints. Heat-fusion joints for 
polypropylene (PP) pipe and fitting joints shall be 
installed with socket-type heat-fused polypropylene fit- 
tings, fusion outlets, butt-fusion polypropylene fittings 
or pipe, or electro-fusion polypropylene fittings. Joint 
surfaces shall be clean and free from moisture. The joint 
shall be undisturbed until cool. Joints shall be made in 
accordance with ASTM F2389 or CSA B137.11. 


605.11.2 Mechanical and Compression Sleeve 
Joints. Mechanical and compression sleeve joints shall 


152 


be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instal- 
lation instructions. 


605.11.3 Threaded Joints. PP pipe shall not be 
threaded. PP transition fittings for connection to other 
piping materials shall only be threaded by use of copper 
alloy or stainless steel inserts molded in the fitting. 


605.12 PVC Plastic Pipe and Joints. PVC plastic pipe 
and fitting joining methods shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall 
comply with Section 605.12.1 through Section 605.12.3. PVC 
piping shall not be exposed to direct sunlight. 


Exception: PVC piping in a location exposed to direct sun- 
light shall not exceed 24 inches (610 mm) in length and be 
wrapped with not less than 0.04 ofan inch (1.02 mm) thick UV 
resistant tape or otherwise protected from UV degradation. 


605.12.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be designed to provide a permanent seal and shall be ofthe 
mechanical or push-on joint. The mechanical joint shall 
include a pipe spigot that has a wall thickness to withstand 
without deformation or collapse; the compressive force 
exerted where the fitting is tightened. The push-on joint 
shall have a minimum wall thickness of the bell at any point 
between the ring and the pipe barrel. The elastomeric gas- 
ket shall comply with ASTM D3139, and be of such size 
and shape as to provide a compressive force against the 
spigot and socket after assembly to provide a positive seal. 


605.12.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement 
joints for PVC pipe and fittings shall be clean from dirt 
and moisture. Pipe shall be cut square and pipe shall be 
deburred. Where surfaces to be joined are cleaned and 
free of dirt, moisture, oil, and other foreign material, apply 
primer purple in color that complies with ASTM F656. 
Primer shall be applied to the surface of the pipe and fit- 
ting is softened. Solvent cement that complies with 
ASTM D2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. Joints 
shall be made while both the inside socket surface and 
outside surface of pipe are wet with solvent cement. Hold 
joint in place and undisturbed for 1 minute after assembly. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] Plastic pipe and fittings joined with 
solvent cement shall utilize Low VOC primer(s), if a 
primer is required, and Low VOC solvent cement(s) as 
defined in Section 214.0. 


605.12.3 Threaded Joints. Threads shall comply with 
ASME B1.20.1. A minimum of Schedule 80 shall be per- 
mitted to be threaded; however, the pressure rating shall 
be reduced by 50 percent. The use of molded fittings 
shall not result in a 50 percent reduction in the pressure 
rating of the pipe provided that the molded fittings shall 
be fabricated so that the wall thickness of the material is 
maintained at the threads. Thread sealant compound that 
is compatible with the pipe and fitting, insoluble in water 
and nontoxic shall be applied to male threads. Caution 
shall be used during assembly to prevent over tightening 
of the PVC components once the thread sealant has been 
applied. Female PVC threaded fittings shall be used with 
plastic male threads only. 


605.13 Stainless Steel Pipe and Joints. Joining meth- 
ods for stainless steel pipe and fittings shall be installed in 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 605.13.1 or Section 605.13.2. 


605.13.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be designed for their intended use. Such joints shall 
include compression, flanged, grooved, press-connect, 
and threaded. 


605.13.2 Welded Joints. Welded joints shall be either 
fusion or resistance welded based on the selection of the 
base metal. The chemical composition of the filler metal 
shall comply with AWS A5.9 based on the alloy content 
of the piping material. 
605.14 Slip Joints. In water piping, slip joints shall be per- 
mitted to be used only on the exposed fixture supply. 


605.15 Dielectric Unions. Dielectric unions where installed 
at points of connection where there is a dissimilarity of metals 
| shall be in accordance with ASSE 1079 or IAPMO PS 66. 
|| [DSA-SS, HCD 1, HCD 2, OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] 
Dielectric unions shall be used at all points of connection 
where there is a dissimilarity of metals. 


605.16 Joints Between Various Materials. Joints 
between various materials shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall 
comply with Section 605.16.1 through Section 605.16.3. 


605.16.1 Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe or Tubing 
to Threaded Pipe Joints. Joints from copper or cop- 
per alloy pipe or tubing to threaded pipe shall be made 
using copper alloy adapter, copper alloy nipple [mini- 
mum 6 inches (152 mm)], dielectric fitting, or dielectric 

| union in accordance with ASSE 1079 or IAPMO PS 66. 
The joint between the copper or copper alloy pipe or tub- 
ing and the fitting shall be a soldered, brazed, flared, or 
press-connect joint and the connection between the 
threaded pipe and the fitting shall be made with a stan- 
dard pipe size threaded joint. 


605.16.2 Plastic Pipe to Other Materials. Where 
connecting plastic pipe to other types of piping, approved 
types of adapter or transition fittings designed for the 
specific transition intended shall be used. 


605.16.3 Stainless Steel to Other Materials. 
Where connecting stainless steel pipe to other types of 
piping, mechanical joints of the compression type, 
dielectric fitting, or dielectric union in accordance with 

I ASSE 1079 or IAPMO PS 66 and designed for the spe- 
cific transition intended shall be used. 


606.0 Valves. 


606.1 General. Valves up to and including 2 inches (50 
mm) in size shall be copper alloy or other approved material. 
Sizes exceeding 2 inches (50 mm) shall be permitted to have 
| bodies of cast iron, copper alloy, or other approved materials. 
Each gate or ball valve shall be a fullway or full-port type 
with working parts of the non-corrosive material. Where 
valves are made from copper alloys containing more than 15 
percent zinc by weight and are used in plastic piping systems, 
they shall be resistant to dezincification and stress corrosion 
cracking in compliance with NSF/ANSI 14. Valves carrying 
water used in potable water systems shall comply with the 
requirements of ASME A112.4.14/CSA B125.14, ASME 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


B16.34, ASTM F1970, ASTM F2389, AWWA C500, 
AWWA C504, AWWA C507, IAPMO/ANSI 71157, MSS | 
SP-67, MSS SP-70, MSS SP-71, MSS SP-72, MSS SP-78, 
MSS SP-80, MSS SP-110, MSS SP-122, or NSF/ANSI 359. 
Valves intended to supply drinking water shall also comply 
with the requirements of NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. 


606.2 Fullway Valve. A fullway valve controlling outlets 
shall be installed on the discharge side of each water meter 
and each unmetered water supply. Water piping supplying 
more than one building on one premise shall be equipped with 
a separate fullway valve to each building, so arranged that the 
water supply can be turned on or off to an individual or sep- 
arate building provided; however, that supply piping to a sin- 
gle-family residence and building accessory thereto shall be 
permitted to be controlled by one valve. Such shutoff valves 
shall be accessible. A fullway valve shall be installed on the 
discharge piping from water supply tanks at or near the tank. 
A fullway valve shall be installed on the cold water supply 
pipe to each water heater at or near the water heater. 
606.3 Multidwelling Units. In multidwelling units, one or 
more shutoff valves shall be provided in each dwelling unit so 
that the water supply to a plumbing fixture or group of fix- 
tures in that dwelling unit can be shut off without stopping 
water supply to fixtures in other dwelling units. These valves 
shall be accessible in the dwelling unit that they control. 
606.4 Multiple Openings. Valves used to control two or 
more openings shall be fullway gate valves, ball valves, or 
other approved valves designed and approved for the service 
intended. 
606.5 Control Valve. A control valve shall be installed 
immediately ahead of each water-supplied appliance and 
immediately ahead of each slip joint or appliance supply. 
Parallel water distribution systems shall provide a control 
valve either immediately ahead of each fixture being supplied 
or installed at the manifold, and shall be identified with the 
fixture being supplied. Where parallel water distribution sys- 
tem manifolds are located in attics, crawl spaces, or other 
locations not readily accessible, a separate shutoff valve shall 
be required immediately ahead of each individual fixture or 
appliance served. 
606.5.1 Manifolds. Field installed manifolds for water 
distribution shall conform with the applicable require- 
ments for valves, pipes, and fittings as referenced in this 
code. Manufactured water distribution manifolds shall 
be in accordance with IAPMO IGC 109. 
606.6 Accessible. Required shutoff or control valves shall 
be accessible. 
606.7 Multiple Fixtures. A single control valve shall be 
installed on a water supply line ahead of an automatic meter- 
ing valve that supplies a battery of fixtures. 
606.8 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Each riser or branch 
shall be provided with an accessible sectionalizing valve in 
hot-and cold-water systems to permit servicing or replace- 
ment of piping or equipment. Stop valves shall be provided 
at each fixture. 
606.9 Check Valve Required. All systems that circulate 
water by means of a pump or other mechanical device or 
method shall have a check valve(s) or equal device(s) 
installed so as to ensure the direction of flow. 


153 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


606.10 Leak Detection Devices. Where leak detection 
devices for water supply and distribution are installed, they 
| shall comply with ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1349. 


607.0 Potable Water Supply Tanks. 


607.1 General. Potable water supply tanks shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions and 
supported in accordance with the California Building Code. 


6072 Private Well Water Tanks. Pressurized potable water 
tanks for private well water systems shall comply with ASSE 
1099/WSC-PST 2000. 


» 6073 Potable Water Tanks. Potable water supply tanks, 

interior tank coatings, or tank liners intended to supply drink- 
| ing water shall comply with NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. 

>) 6074 Venting. Tanks used for potable water shall be tightly 
covered and vented in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions. Such vent shall be screened with a cor- 
rosion-resistant material of not less than number 24 mesh. 

)» 6075 Overflow. Tanks shall have not less than a 16 square 
inch (0.01 m?) overflow that is screened with a corrosion- 
resistant material of not less than number 24 mesh. 


>» 6076 Valves. Pressurized tanks shall be provided with a listed 
pressure-relief valve installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions. The relief valve shall be dis- 
charged in accordance with Section 608.5. Where a potable 
water supply tank is located above the fixtures, appliances, or 
system components it serves, it shall be equipped with a vac- 

| uum relief valve that complies with ANSI Z21.22/CSA 4.4. 


608.0 Water Pressure, Pressure Regulators, Pres- 
sure Relief Valves, and Vacuum Relief Valves. 
608.1 Inadequate Water Pressure. Where the water pres- 
sure in the main or other source of supply will not provide a 
residual water pressure of not less than 15 pounds force per 
square inch (psi) (103 kPa), after allowing for friction and 
other pressure losses, a tank and a pump or other means that 
will provide said 15 psi (103 kPa) pressure shall be installed. 
Where fixtures, fixture fittings, or both are installed that, 
| require a residual pressure exceeding 15 psi (103 kPa), that 
minimum residual pressure shall be provided. 
608.2 Excessive Water Pressure. Where static water 
| pressure in the water supply piping exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa), 
an approved-type pressure regulator preceded by an adequate 
strainer shall be installed and the static pressure reduced to 
80 psi (552 kPa) or less. Pressure regulators for potable water 
distribution systems shall comply with ASSE 1003 or 
AWWA C530. Pressure regulator(s) equal to or exceeding 
1% inches (40 mm) shall not require a strainer. Such regula- 
tor(s) shall control the pressure to water outlets in the build- 
ing unless otherwise approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. Each such regulator and strainer shall be acces- 
sibly located aboveground or in a vault equipped with a prop- 
erly sized and sloped boresighted drain to daylight, shall be 
protected from freezing, and shall have the strainer readily 
accessible for cleaning without removing the regulator or 
strainer body or disconnecting the supply piping. 
Pipe size determinations shall be based on 80 percent of 
the reduced pressure where using Table 610.4. 


154 


An approved expansion tank shall be installed in the cold 
water distribution piping downstream of each such regulator 
to prevent pressure exceeding 80 psi from developing due to 
thermal expansion. Expansion tanks used in potable ad 
systems intended to supply drinking water shall comply with 
NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. The expansion tank shall be properly 
sized, securely fastened to the structure, and installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and listing. Systems designed by a licensed plumbing con- 
tractor or registered design professionals shall be permitted to 
use approved pressure relief valves in lieu of expansion tanks 
provided such relief valves have a maximum pressure relief 
setting of 100 psi (689 kPa) or less. 


608.3 Expansion Tanks, and Combination Tempera- 
ture and Pressure-Relief Valves. A water system pro- 
vided with a check valve, backflow preventer, or other 
normally closed device that prevents dissipation of building 
pressure back into the water main, independent of the type of 
water heater used, shall be provided with an approved, listed, 
and adequately sized expansion tank or other approved device 
having a similar function to control thermal expansion. Pre- 
pressurized water expansion tanks shall comply with 
IAPMO/ANSI Z1088. Such expansion tank or other approved I 
device shall be installed on the building side of the check 
valve, backflow preventer, or other device and shall be sized, 
securely fastened to the structure, and installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


A water system containing storage water heating equip- 
ment shall be provided with an approved, listed, adequately 
sized combination temperature and pressure-relief valve, 
except for listed nonstorage instantaneous heaters having an 
inside diameter of not more than 3 inches (80 mm). Each such 
approved combination temperature and pressure-relief valve 
shall be installed on the water-heating device in an approved 
location based on its listing requirements and the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. Each such combination tem- 
perature and pressure-relief valve shall be provided with a 
drain in accordance with Section 608.5. 


Exception: An expansion tank shall not be required for an 
instantaneous non-storage water heater. 


608.4 Pressure Relief Valves. Each pressure relief valve 
shall be an approved automatic type with drain, and each such 
relief valve shall be set at a pressure of not more than 150 psi 
(1034 kPa). No shutoff valve shall be installed between the 
relief valve and the system. 

608.5 Discharge Piping. The discharge piping serving a 
temperature relief valve, pressure relief valve, or combination of 
both shall have no valves, obstructions, or means of isolation 
and be provided with the following: 


(1) Not less than the size of the valve outlet and shall dis- 
charge full size to the flood level of the area receiving 
the discharge and pointing down. 


(2) Materials shall be rated at not less than the operating tem- 
perature ofthe system and approved for such use or shall 
comply with ASME A112.4.1. 

Discharge pipe shall discharge independently by gravity 
through an air gap into the drainage system or outside of 
the building with the end of the pipe not exceeding 2 feet 


(3 


— 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(610 mm) and not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the 
ground and pointing downwards. 


(4) Discharge in such a manner that does not cause personal 
injury or structural damage. 


(5) No part of such discharge pipe shall be trapped or subject 
to freezing. 


(6) The terminal end of the pipe shall not be threaded. 


(7) Discharge from a relief valve into a water heater pan 
shall be prohibited. 


(8) The discharge termination point shall be readily observ- 
able. 


608.6 Water-Heating Devices. A water-heating device 
connected to a separate storage tank and having valves 
between said heater and tank shall be provided with an 
approved water pressure relief valve. 


608.7 Vacuum Relief Valves. Where a hot-water storage 
tank or an indirect water heater is located at an elevation 
above the fixture outlets in the hot-water system, a vacuum 

| relief valve that complies with ANSI Z21.22/CSA 4.4 shall be 
installed on the storage tank or heater. 


609.0 Installation, Testing, Unions, and Location. 
609.1 Installation. Water piping shall be adequately sup- 
ported in accordance with Table 313.3. Burred ends shall be 
reamed to the full bore of the pipe or tube. Changes in direc- 
tion shall be made by the appropriate use of fittings, except 
that changes in direction in copper or copper alloy tubing 
shall be permitted to be made with bends, provided that such 
bends are made with bending equipment that does not deform 
or create a loss in the cross-sectional area of the tubing. 
Changes in direction are allowed with flexible pipe and tub- 
ing without fittings in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. Provisions shall be made for expansion in hot- 
water piping. Piping, equipment, appurtenances, and devices 
shall be installed in a workmanlike manner in accordance 
with the provisions and intent of the code. Building supply 
yard piping shall be not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below 
the average local frost depth. The cover shall be not less than 
12 inches (305 mm) below finish grade. 


609.2 Trenches. Water pipes shall not be run or laid in the 

same trench as building sewer or drainage piping constructed 

of clay or materials that are not approved for use within a 

building unless both of the following conditions are met: 

(1) The bottom of the water pipe shall be not less than 12 
inches (305 mm) above the top of the sewer or drain line. 

(2) The water pipe shall be placed on a solid shelf excavated 
at one side of the common trench with a clear horizontal 
distance of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the 
sewer or drain line. 

Water pipes crossing sewer or drainage piping con- 
structed of clay or materials that are not approved for use 
within a building shall be laid not less than 12 inches 
(305 mm) above the sewer or drainpipe. 

609.3 Under Concrete Slab. Water piping installed within 
a building and in or under a concrete floor slab resting on the 
ground shall be installed in accordance with the following 
requirements: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


(1) Ferrous piping shall have a protective coating of an 
approved type; machine applied and in accordance with 
recognized standards. Field wrapping shall provide 
equivalent protection and shall be restricted to those short 
sections and fittings necessarily stripped for threading. 
Zinc coating (galvanizing) shall not be deemed adequate 
protection for piping or fittings. Approved nonferrous 
piping shall not be required to be wrapped. 


(2) Copper or copper alloy tubing shall be installed without 
joints where possible. Where joints are permitted, they 
shall be brazed, and fittings shall be wrought copper. 


For the purpose of this section, “within a building" shall 
mean within the fixed limits of the building foundation. 


609.4 Testing. Upon completion of a section or of the entire 
hot and cold water supply system, the system shall be tested 
with water or air. The potable water test pressure shall be 
greater than or equal to the working pressure under which the 
system is to be used. The air pressure shall be a minimum of 50 
psi (345 kPa). Plastic pipe shall not be tested with air. The pip- 
ing system shall withstand the test pressure without showing 
evidence of leakage for a period of not less than 15 minutes. 


Exception: PEX, PP or PE-RT tube shall be permitted to be 
tested with air where permitted by the manufacturer's instruc- 
tions. 


609.5 Unions. Unions shall be installed in the water supply 
piping not more than 12 inches (305 mm) of regulating equip- 
ment, water heating, conditioning tanks, and similar equip- 
ment that requires service by removal or replacement in a 
manner that will facilitate its ready removal. 


609.6 Location. Except as provided in Section 609.7, no 
building supply shall be located in a lot other than the lot that 
is the site of the building or structure served by such building 
supply. 

609.7 Abutting Lot. Nothing contained in this code shall 
be construed to prohibit the use of an abutting lot to: 


(1) Provide access to connect a building supply to an avail- 
able public water service where proper cause and legal 
easement not in violation of other requirements have 
been first established to the satisfaction of the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


(2) Provide additional space for a building supply where the 
proper cause, transfer of ownership, or change of bound- 
ary not in violation of other requirements have been first 
established to the satisfaction of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. The instrument recording such action shall 
constitute an agreement with the Authority Having Juris- 
diction, which shall clearly state and show that the areas 
so joined or used shall be maintained as a unit during the 
time they are so used. Such an agreement shall be 
recorded in the office of the County Recorder as a part of 
the conditions of ownership of said properties, and shall 
be binding on heirs, successors, and assigns to such prop- 
erties. A copy of the instrument recording such proceed- 
ings shall be filed with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


609.8 Pumps. Pumps shall be installed in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


155 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


609.8.1 Access. Pumps shall be accessible for repairs. 


609.8.2 Potable Water Pumps. Pumps intended to 
supply drinking water shall be in accordance with 
| NSF/ANSI/CAN 61. 


609.8.3 Hot-Water Recirculating Pumps. For health- 
care facilities, long term care facilities, hotels, or motels, 
devices that automatically turn off the recirculation 
pump(s) shall not be required. 
609.9 Low-Pressure Cutoff Required on Booster 
Pumps for Water Distribution Systems. Where a 
booster pump (excluding a fire pump) is connected to a build- 
ing supply or underground water pipe, a low-pressure cutoff 
switch on the inlet side of the pump shall be installed not 
more than 5 feet (1524 mm) of the inlet. The cutoff switch 
shall be set for not less than 10 psi (69 kPa). A pressure gauge 
shall be installed between the shutoff valve and the pump. 


609.10 Disinfection of Potable Water System. New or 
repaired potable water systems shall be disinfected prior to 
use where required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
[OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Prior to utilization of newly 
constructed or altered potable water piping systems, all 
affected potable water piping shall be disinfected using pro- 
cedures prescribed in California Plumbing Code Sections 

|| 609.10(1) through 609.10(5). The method to be followed 
shall be that prescribed by the Health Authority or, in case no 
method is prescribed by it, the following: 

(1) The pipe system shall be flushed with clean, potable water 

until potable water appears at the points of the outlet. 

(2) The system or parts thereof shall be filled with a water- 
chlorine solution containing not less than 50 parts per 
million of chlorine, and the system or part thereof shall 
be valved-off and allowed to stand for 24 hours; or, the 
system or part thereof shall be filled with a water-chlo- 
rine solution containing not less than 200 parts per mil- 
lion of chlorine and allowed to stand for 3 hours. 
Following the allowed standing time, the system shall be 
flushed with clean, potable water until the chlorine resid- 
ual in the water coming from the system does not exceed 
the chlorine residual in the flushing water. 


(3 


— 


(4) The procedure shall be repeated where it is shown by a 
bacteriological examination made by an approved agency 
that contamination persists in the system. 


(5) [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Disinfection shall be com- 
pleted no more than three weeks before whole or partial 
beneficial occupancy. 


(a) Where occupancy is delayed two weeks from disin- 
fection, flushing of all fixtures shall again be com- 
pleted. 


(b) Where occupancy is delayed four weeks after disin- 
fection, disinfection and flushing shall again be com- 
pleted. 


609.11 Water Hammer. [Not adopted by HCD] Building 
water supply systems where quick-acting valves are installed 
shall be provided with water hammer arrester(s) to absorb high 
pressures resulting from the quick closing of these valves. 
Water hammer arresters shall be approved mechanical devices 
that comply with ASSE 1010 or PDI-WH 201 and shall be 
installed as close as possible to quick-acting valves. 


156 


609.11.1 Mechanical Devices. Where listed mechani- 
cal devices are used, the manufacturer's specifications as 
to location and method of installation shall be followed. 


609.12 Pipe Insulation. Insulation of domestic hot water 
piping shall be in accordance with Section 609.12.1 and Sec- 
tion 609.12.2. 

609.12.1 Insulation Requirements. Domestic hot 

water piping shall be insulated. 

609.12.2 Pipe Insulation Wall Thickness. Hot water 

pipe insulation shall have a minimum wall thickness of 

not less than the diameter of the pipe for a pipe up to 2 

inches (50 mm) in diameter. Insulation wall thickness 

shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) for a pipe of 2 

inches (50 mm) or more in diameter. 

Exceptions: 

(1) Piping that penetrates framing members shall not be 
required to have pipe insulation for the distance of 
the framing penetration. 

(2) Hot water piping between the fixture control valve 
or supply stop and the fixture or appliance shall not 
be required to be insulated. 


609.12.3 California Energy Code Pipe Insulation 
Requirements. [CEC] See California Energy Code Sec- 
tions 150.0(j)2 and 120.3(c) for pipe insulation require- 
ments based on fluid temperature and pipe diameter — for 
domestic hot water piping. The California Energy Code 
requires that piping that penetrates metal framing shall 
use grommets, plugs, wrapping or other insulating mate- 
rial to assure that no contact is made with the metal fram- 
ing. The California Energy Code also requires that 
insulation shall abut securely against all framing mem- 
bers, and places conditions on when installed wall or attic 
insulation that surrounds installed piping can be consid- 
ered to provide pipe insulation meeting requirements. 


610.0 Size of Potable Water Piping. 


610.1 Size. The size of each water meter and each potable 
water supply pipe from the meter or other source of supply to 
the fixture supply branches, risers, fixtures, connections, out- 
lets, or other uses shall be based on the total demand and shall 
be determined according to the methods and procedures out- 
lined in this section. Water piping systems shall be designed 
to ensure that the maximum velocities allowed by the code 
and the applicable standard are not exceeded. 


610.2 Pressure Loss. Where a water filter, water softener, 
backflow prevention device, tankless water heater, or similar 
device is installed in a water supply line, the pressure loss 
through such devices shall be included in the pressure loss cal- 
culations of the system, and the water supply pipe and meter 
shall be adequately sized to provide for such a pressure loss. 


No water filter, water softener, backflow prevention device, 
or similar device regulated by this code shall be installed in a 
potable water supply piping where the installation of such 
device produces an excessive pressure drop in such water sup- 
ply piping. In the absence of specific pressure drop information, 
the diameter of the inlet or outlet of such device or its connect- 
ing piping shall be not less than the diameter of such water dis- 
tribution piping to the fixtures served by the device. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Such devices shall be of a type approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction and shall be tested for flow rating and 
pressure loss by an approved laboratory or recognized testing 
agency to standards consistent with the intent of this chapter. 


610.3 Quantity of Water. The quantity of water required to be 
supplied to every plumbing fixture shall be represented by fix- 
ture units, as shown in Table 610.3. Equivalent fixture values 
shown in Table 610.3 include both hot and cold water demand. 


610.4 Sizing Water Supply and Distribution Systems. 
Systems within the range of Table 610.4 shall be permitted to 
be sized from that table or by the method in accordance with 
Section 610.5. 


Listed parallel water distribution systems shall be 
installed in accordance with their listing, but at no time shall 
a portion of the system exceed the maximum velocities 
allowed by the code. 


610.5 Sizing per Appendices A, C, and M. Except as 
provided in Section 610.4, the size of each water piping sys- 
tem shall be determined in accordance with the procedure set 
forth in Appendix A. For alternative methods of sizing water 
supply systems, see Appendix C or Appendix M. 


610.6 Friction and Pressure Loss. Except where the type 
of pipe used and the water characteristics are such that no 
decrease in capacity due to the length of service (age of sys- 
tem) is expected, friction-loss data shall be obtained from the 
*Fairly Rough" or *Rough" charts in Appendix A of this 
code. Friction or pressure losses in a water meter, valve, and 
fittings shall be obtained from the same sources. Pressure 
losses through water-treating equipment, backflow preven- 
tion devices, or other flow-restricting devices shall be com- 
puted in accordance with Section 610.2. 


610.7 Conditions for Using Table 610.4. On a proposed 
water piping installation sized using Table 610.4, the follow- 
ing conditions shall be determined: 


(1) Total number of fixture units as determined from Table 
610.3, Equivalent Fixture Units, for the fixtures to be 
installed. 


(2) Developed length of supply pipe from meter to the most 
remote outlet. 


(3) Difference in elevation between the meter or other source 
of supply and the highest fixture or outlet. 


(4) Pressure in the street main or another source of supply 
at the locality where the installation is to be made. 


(5) Inlocalities where there is a fluctuation of pressure in the 
main throughout the day, the water piping system shall be 
designed on the basis of the minimum pressure available. 

610.8 Size of Meter and Building Supply Pipe Using 

Table 610.4. The size of the meter and the building supply 

pipe shall be determined as follows: 

(1) Determine the available pressure at the water meter or 
other source of supply. 

(2) Add or subtract depending on positive or negative ele- 
vation change, !^ psi (3.4 kPa) for each foot (305 mm) of 
difference in elevation between such source of supply 
and the highest water supply outlet in the building or on 
the premises. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


(3) Use the “pressure range" group within which this pres- 
sure will fall using Table 610.4. 


(4) Select the “length” column that is equal to or longer than 
the required length. 


(5) Follow down the column to a fixture unit value equal to 
or exceeding the total number of fixture units required 
by the installation. 


(6) Having located the proper fixture unit value for the 
required length, sizes of meter and building supply pipe 
as found in the two left-hand columns shall be applied. 


No building supply pipe shall be less than % of an inch 
(20 mm) in diameter. 


610.9 Size of Branches. Where Table 610.4 is used, the min- 
imum size of each branch shall be determined by the total fix- 
ture units served by that branch and then following the steps in 
Section 610.8. No branch piping shall exceed the total demand 
in fixture units for the system computed from Table 610.3. 


610.10 Sizing for Flushometer Valves. Where using 
Table 610.4 to size water supply systems serving flushome- 
ter valves, the number of flushometer fixture units assigned to 
every section of pipe, whether branch or main, shall be deter- 
mined by the number and category of flushometer valves 
served by that section of pipe, in accordance with Table 
610.10. Piping supplying a flushometer valve shall be not less 
in size than the valve inlet. 

Where using Table 610.10 to size water piping, care shall 
be exercised to assign flushometer fixture units based on the 
number and category of fixtures served. 


TABLE 610.10 
FLUSHOMETER FIXTURE UNITS FOR WATER 
SIZING USING TABLE 610.3 


FIXTURE CATEGORY: WATER CLOSET WITH FLUSHOMETER VALVES 


INDIVIDUAL 
NUMBER OF  |FIXTURE UNITS FIXTURE UNITS ASSIGNED 
FOR WATER CLOSETS AND 
FLUSHOMETER | ASSIGNED IN 
VALVES DECREASING SIMILAR 10-UNIT FIXTURES IN 
ACCUMULATIVE VALUES 
VALUE 
1 40 40 
2 30 70 
3 20 90 
4 15 105 
РА 10 each 115 plus 10 for each additional 


fixture in excess of 5 


FIXTURE CATEGORY: URINAL 


S WITH FLUSHOMETER VALVES 


INDIVIDUAL 
NUMBER OF  |FIXTURE UNITS წონ UNITS ASSIGHED 
FOR URINALS AND SIMILAR 
FLUSHOMETER | ASSIGNED IN 
VALVES DECREASING SUNIT FIXTURES IN 
ACCUMULATIVE VALUES 
VALUE 
1 20 20 
2 15 35 
3 10 45 
4 8 53 
оре 5 сасһ 58 plus 5 for each additional 


fixture in excess of 5 


157 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


TABLE 610.3 
WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNITS (WSFU) AND MINIMUM FIXTURE BRANCH PIPE SIZES? 
MINIMUM FIXTURE 
APPLIANCES, APPURTENANCES OR FIXTURES? BRANCH PIPE SIZE!^ PRIVATE PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 
(inches) 

Bathtub or Combination Bath/Shower (fill) 72 4.0 4.0 = 

¥ inch Bathtub Fill Valve 3A 10.0 10.0 — 
Bidet #2 1.0 — — 
Clothes Washer #2 4.0 4.0 — 
Dental Unit, cuspidor 72 m 1.0 == 
Dishwasher, domestic ГА 1.5 1.5 — 
Drinking Fountain or Water Cooler % 0.5 0.5 0.75 
Hose Bibb 72 2.5 2.5 — 
Hose Bibb, each additional? /h 1.0 1.0 — 
Lavatory /h 1.0 1.0 1.0 
Lawn Sprinkler, each head? — 1.0 1.0 — 
Mobilehome or Manufactured Home, each (minimum)? EE 6.0 — — 
Sinks — x: = — 

Bar /2 1.0 2.0 mE 

Clinical Faucet #2 — 3.0 — 

Clinical Flushometer Valve with or without faucet 1 — 8.0 == 

Kitchen, domestic with or without dishwasher /h 1.5 1.5 — 

Laundry 72 1.5 1.5 = 

Service or Mop Basin #2 1.5 3.0 —- 

Washup, each set of faucets /h — 2.0 = 
Shower, per head /h 2.0 2.0 — 
Urinal, 1.0 GPF Flushometer Valve 34 See Footnote" = 
Urinal, greater than 1.0 GPF Flushometer Valve 3A See Footnote" == 
Urinal, flush tank /h 2.0 2.0 3.0 
Nonwater Urinal with Drain Cleansing Action /2 1.0 1.0 1.0 
Wash Fountain, circular spray 3A == 4.0 = 
Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Gravity Tank 72 2.5 2.5 3.5 
Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Tank /h 2.5 2.5 3.5 
Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve 1 See Footnote” == 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Gravity Tank % 3.0 5.5 7.0 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve 1 See Footnote’ == 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
Notes: 


Size of the cold branch pipe, or both the hot and cold branch pipes. 

Appliances, appurtenances, or fixtures not referenced in this table shall be permitted to be sized by reference to fixtures having a similar flow rate and fre- 
quency of use. 

The listed fixture unit values represent their load on the cold water building supply. The separate cold water and hot water fixture unit value for fixtures hav- 
ing both hot and cold water connections shall be permitted to be each taken as three-quarter of the listed total value of the fixture. 

^ The listed minimum supply branch pipe sizes for individual fixtures are the nominal (I.D.) pipe size. 

> For fixtures or supply connections likely to impose continuous flow demands, determine the required flow in gallons per minute (gpm) (L/s), and add it sep- 
arately to the demand in gpm (L/s) for the distribution system or portions thereof. 

Assembly [Public Use (See Table 422.1)]. 

Where sizing flushometer systems, see Section 610.10. 

Reduced fixture unit loading for additional hose bibbs is to be used where sizing total building demand and for pipe sizing where more than one hose bibb 
is supplied by a segment of water distribution pipe. The fixture branch to each hose bibb shall be sized on the basis of 2.5 fixture units. 

For water supply fixture unit values related to lots within mobilehome parks in all parts of the State of California, see California Code of Regulations, Title 
25, Division 1, Chapter 2, Article 5, Section 1278. For water supply fixture unit values related to lots within special occupancy parks in all parts of the State 
of California, see California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, Article 5, Section 2278. 


2 


სა 


oN > 


© 


158 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FIXTURE UNIT TABLE FOR DETERMINING WATER PIPE AND METER SIZES 


TABLE 610.4 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


METER AND ано MAXIMUM A sene LENGTH 
STREET AND 
SERVICE | BRANCHES | 40 60 80 100 | 150 | 200 | 250 | 300 | 400 | 500 | 600 | 700 | 800 | 900 | 1000 
(inches) í 
(inches) 
PRESSURE RANGE - 30 to 45 psi! 
34 102 6 5 4 3 2 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
% % 16 16 14 12 9 6 5 5 4 4 3 2 2 2 1 
3A 1 29 25 23 21 17 15 13 12 10 8 6 6 6 6 6 
1 1 36 31 27 25 20 17 15 13 12 10 8 6 6 6 6 
3A 11⁄4 36 33 31 28 24 23 21 19 17 16 13 12 12 11 11 
1 1% 54 47 42 38 32 28 25 23 19 17 14 12 12 11 11 
1% 11⁄4 78 68 57 48 38 32 28 25 21 18 15 12 12 11 11 
1 1% 85 84 79 65 56 48 43 38 32 28 26 22 21 20 20 
1% 1% 150 124 105 91 70 57 49 45 36 31 26 23 21 20 20 
2 1% 151 129 129 110 80 64 53 46 38 32 27 23 21 20 20 
1 2 85 85 85 85 85 85 82 80 66 61 57 52 49 46 43 
1% 2 220 | 205 190 176 155 138 127. 120 104 85 70 61 57 54 51 
2 2 370 | 327 | 292 | 265 217 185 164 147 124 96 70 61 57 54 51 
2 2% 445 | 418 | 390 | 370 | 330 | 300 | 280 | 265 240 | 220 198 175 158 143 133 
PRESSURE RANGE - 46 to 60 psi! 
% 102 7 7 6 5 4 3 2 2 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 
% % 20 | 20 | 19 17 | 14 | IH 9 8 6 5 4 4 3 3 3 
3A 1 39 39 36 33 28 23 21 19 17 14 12 10 9 8 8 
1 1 39 39 39 36 30 25 23 20 18 15 12 10 9 8 8 
Л 1M 39 39 39 39 39 39 34 32 27 25 22 19 19 17 16 
1 1M 78 78 76 67 52 44 39 36 30 27 24 20 19 17 16 
1% 1% 78 78 78 78 66 52 44 39 33 29 24 20 19 17 16 
1 1% 85 85 85 85 85 85 80 67 55 49 41 37 34 32 30 
1% 1% 151 151 151 151 128 105 90 78 62 52 42 38 35 32 30 
2. 1% 151 151 151 151 150 117 98 84 67 55 42 38 35 32 30 
1 2 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 83 80 
1% 2 370 | 370 | 340 | 318 | 272 | 240 | 220 198 170 150 135 123 110 102 94 
2 2 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 368 | 318 | 280 | 250 | 205 165 142 123 110 102 94 
2 2% 654 | 640 | 610 | 580 | 535 500 | 470 | 440 | 400 | 365 335 | 315 285 267 | 250 
PRESSURE RANGE - Over 60 psi! 
% 102 7 7 7 6 5 4 3 3 1 1 1 1 1 0 
% 3 20 20 20 20 17 13 11 10 7 6 6 5 4 4 
3A 1 39 39 39 39 35 30 27 24 21 17 14 13 12 12 11 
1 1 39 39 39 39 38 32 29 26 22 18 14 13 12 12 11 
3A ПА 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 39 34 28 26 25 23 22 21 
1 11⁄4 78 78 78 78 74 62 53 47 39 31 26 25 23 22 21 
1% 11⁄4 78 78 78 78 78 74 65 54 43 34 26 25 23 22 21 
1 1% 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 81 64 51 48 46 43 40 
1% 1% 151 151 151 151 151 151 130 113 88 73 51 51 46 43 40 
2 1% 151 151 151 151 151 151 142 122 98 82 64 51 46 43 40 
1 2 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 85 
1% 2 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 360 | 335 | 305 282 | 244 | 212 187 172 153 141 129 
2. 2 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 370 | 340 | 288 | 245 204 172 153 141 129 
2 2% 654 | 654 | 654 | 654 | 654 | 650 | 610 | 570 | 510 | 460 | 430 | 404 | 380 | 356 | 329 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
Notes: 
! Available static pressure after head loss. 
? Building supply, not less than 34 of an inch (20 mm) nominal size. 
2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 159 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


In the example below, fixture units assigned to each sec- 
tion of pipe are computed. Each capital letter refers to the sec- 
tion of pipe above it unless otherwise shown. 


LAV LAV UR UR WC WC 


LAV LAV UR UR WC WC 


«— M 


LAV UR WC LAV UR WC 


1 WC - 40 F.U. 
2 WC = 70 F.U. 

2 WC (70) + 1 UR (20) = 90 F.U. 

2 WC (70) + 2 UR (35) = 105 F.U. 

2 WC (70) + 2 UR (35) + 1 LAV (1) = 106 F.U. 
2 WC (70) + 2 UR (35) + 2 LAV (2) = 107 F.U. 
1LAV=1F.U. 

2 LAV -2F.U. 


2 LAV (2) + 1 UR (20) = 22 F.U. 

2 LAV (2)+ 2 UR (35) =37 FU. 

2 LAV (2) +2 UR (35) + 1 WC (40) = 77 F.U. 

2 LAV (2) + 2 UR (35) + 2 WC (70) = 107 F.U. 
4 WC (105) + 4 UR (53) + 4 LAV (4) = 162 F.U. 
1 WC - 40 F.U. 

1 WC (40) + 1 UR (20) = 60 F.U. 

1 WC (40) + 1 UR (20) + 1 LAV (1) = 61 F.U. 

2 WC (70) + 1 UR (20) + 1 LAV (1) 291 F.U. 

2 WC (70) + 2 UR (35) + 1 LAV (1) = 106 F.U. 
2 WC (70) +2 UR (35) + 2 LAV (2) = 107 F.U. 
6 WC (125) + 6 UR (63) + 6 LAV (6) = 194 F.U. 


Pe wo vo Se PASS BOF Sep eS 


EXAMPLE 610.10 
SIZING METHOD FOR PUBLIC USE FIXTURES 
USING TABLE 610.10 


610.11 Sizing Systems for Flushometer Tanks. The size 
of branches and mains serving flushometer tanks shall be con- 
sistent with the sizing procedures for flush tank water closets. 
610.12 Sizing for Velocity. Water piping systems shall not 
exceed the maximum velocities listed in this section or 
Appendix A. 


160 


610.12.1 Copper Tube Systems. Maximum veloci- 
ties in copper and copper alloy tube and fitting systems 
shall not exceed 8 feet per second (ft/s) (2.4 m/s) in cold 
water and 5 ft/s (1.5 m/s) in hot water. 


610.12.2 Tubing Systems Using Copper Fittings. 
Maximum velocities through copper fittings in tubing 
other than copper shall not exceed 8 ft/s (2.4 m/s) in cold 
water and 5 ft/s (1.5 m/s) in hot water. 


610.13 Exceptions. The provisions of this section relative 
to the size of water piping shall not apply to the following: 


(1) Water supply piping systems designed in accordance 
with recognized engineering procedures acceptable to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


(2) Alteration of or minor additions to existing installations 
provided the Authority Having Jurisdiction finds that 
there will be an adequate supply of water to operate fix- 
tures. 


(3) Replacement of existing fixtures or appliances. 
(4) Piping that is part of fixture equipment. 


(5) Unusual conditions where, in the judgment of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, an adequate supply of 
water is provided to operate fixtures and equipment. 


(6) The size and material of irrigation water piping installed 
outside of a building or structure and separated from the 
potable water supply by means of an approved air gap or 
backflow prevention device are not regulated by this 
code. The potable water piping system supplying each 
such irrigation system shall be adequately sized as 
required elsewhere in this chapter to deliver the full con- 
nected demand of both the domestic use and the irriga- 
tion systems. 


611.0 Drinking Water Treatment Units. 


611.1 Application. Drinking water treatment units shall 
comply with the applicable referenced standards in Table 
611.1. 
611.1.1 Alkaline Water Treatment. Alkaline water 
treatment devices shall comply with IAPMO ICC 322. 
611.1.2 Scale Reduction Devices. Scale reduction 
devices shall comply with IAPMO/ANSI 7601. I 
611.2 Air Gap Discharge. Discharge from drinking water 
treatment units shall enter the drainage system through an air 
gap in accordance with Table 603.3.1 or an air gap device 
that complies with Table 603.2, NSF/ANSI 58, or IAPMO | 
PS 65. 
611.3 Connection Tubing. The tubing to and from drink- 
ing water treatment units shall be of a size and material as 
recommended by the manufacturer. 
611.4 Sizing of Residential Softeners. Residential-use 
water softeners shall be sized in accordance with Table 611.4. 


612.0 Residential Fire Sprinkler Systems. 


612.1 Installation. Residential Sprinkler Systems shall be 
installed in compliance with the California Residential Code 
or the California Fire Code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


TABLE 611.1 
DRINKING WATER TREATMENT UNITS 
RESIDENTIAL 
APPLICATION COMMERCIAL 
POINT OF USE POINT OF ENTRY 

Aesthetic. Contaminant NSF/ANSI 42 NSF/ANSI 42 ASSE 1087 and NSF/ANSI 42* 
Reduction (filters) 

Health Related Сошашшаш NSF/ANSI 53 NSF/ANSI 53 ASSE 1087 and NSF/ANSI 53* 
Reduction (filters) 

Water Softener = NSF/ANSI 44 ASSE 1087 
Ultraviolet Water Treatment NSF/ANSI 55 NSF/ANSI 55 ASSE 1087 

Reverse Osmosis NSF/ANSI 58 NSF/ANSI/CAN 61 ASSE 1087 
Distillation NSF/ANSI 62 NSF/ANSI 62 ASSE 1087 


* Required for commercial modular systems only. 


TABLE 611.4 
SIZING OF RESIDENTIAL WATER SOFTENERS? 


SOFTENER CONNECTION NUMBER OF BATHROOM 
к GROUPS SERVED! 
(inches) 
54 up to 22 
1 up to 4? 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
Notes: 


|! Installation ofa kitchen sink and dishwasher, laundry sink, and automatic 

clothes washer permitted without additional size increase. 

? An additional water closet and lavatory permitted. 

? Over four bathroom groups, the softener size shall be engineered for the 
specific installation. 

^ See also Appendix A, Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply 
System, and Appendix C, Alternate Plumbing Systems, for alternate meth- 
ods of sizing water supply systems. 


613.0 Domestic Hot-Water Distribution Systems for 
Health Facilities and Clinics. [OSHPD 1, 2, 3,4 & 5] 


613.1 The domestic water-heating equipment and distribu- 
tion systems shall supply water at the temperature and 
amounts shown in Table 613.1. Where the system is designed 
by a mechanical engineer, appropriate diversity factors may 
be utilized. 


TABLE 613.1 
I [OSHPD 1, 2, 3, 4 & 5] HOT WATER USE 
CLINICAL DIETARY! LAUNDRY? 
Liter/Hour/Bed 11.9 7.2 7.6 
Gallons/Hour/Bed 3 2 2 
Temperature °C 41-49.0 49.0? 71.0 
| Temperature °Ё 105-120.0 120.0? 160.0 


! Rinse water temperature at warewasher or potsinks shall be 1809F 
(82°C) unless a chemical disinfection is provided. 


? The required temperature of 160°F (71°C) in the laundry is that meas- 


ure in the washing machine and shall be supplied so that the tempera- 
ture may be maintained over the entire wash and rinse period. 


Exception: A lower water temperature of 140°F (60°C) may be utilized, pro- 
vided linens are subsequently passed through a tumbler dryer at 180°F 
(82°C) or a flatwork ironer at 300°F (149°C). 


? Dietary hot water temperature shall meet minimum temperature require- 
ments at the point of use per the health authority. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


613.2 At least two pieces of hot-water-heating equipment shall 
be provided to supply hot water for dishwashing and minimum 
patient services such as handwashing and bathing. The 
arrangement of water-heating equipment shall be based on the 
capacity and capability of the equipment to provide the 
required hot water during periods of breakdown or mainte- 
nance of any one water heater. Booster heaters for 125°F to 
180°F (52°C to 82°C) water are acceptable as a second piece 
of equipment for dishwashing. Where storage tanks are sepa- 
rate from the water heater, at least two independent storage 
tanks shall be provided. Storage water heaters and hot-water 
storage tanks shall be maintained at 140°F (60°C) or above. 


Exception: A single piece of hot-water-heating equipment shall 
be permitted, subject to the Authority Having Jurisdiction, for 
primary care and non-specialty clinics where the equipment is 
limited to the service of handwashing fixtures. 


613.3 Instantaneous heaters are permitted for supplying hot 
water to handwashing and bathing fixtures if a continuous 
mechanical recirculation system is also provided. 


613.4 Water storage tanks shall be fabricated of corrosion- 
resistant materials or lined with corrosion-resistant materials. 


613.5 Temperature control valves shall be provided to auto- 
matically regulate the temperature of hot water delivered to 
plumbing fixtures used by patients to a range of 105°F (41°C) 
minimum to 120°F (49°C) maximum. High temperature 
alarm set at 125°F (52°C) shall be provided. The 
audible/visual device for the high temperature alarm shall 
annunciate at a continuously occupied location. 


613.6 Hot-water distribution system serving patient care areas 
shall be under constant mechanical recirculation to provide 
continuous hot water at each hot water outlet. Hot water recir- 
culation piping shall return the recirculation loop back through 
the hot water source. Non-recirculated fixture branch piping 
shall not exceed 10 feet (3.05 meters) in length. Dead-end pip- 
ing (risers with no flow, branches with no fixture) shall not be 
installed. In renovation projects, dead-end piping shall be 
removed in the area of renovation. Empty risers, mains, and 
branches installed for future use shall be permitted. 


613.7 At fixtures where water exceeding 125°F (52°C) is acces- 
sible to patients or personnel, warning signs in letters at least 
2 inches (51 mm) high shall be posted above the fixtures. 


613.8 Sectionalizing valves shall be provided as required by 
Section 606.8. 


161 


WATER SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION 


613.9 Hot water distribution shall include test ports and valved 
openings for flushing of portions of the system in accordance 
with the facilities water management program as defined in 
Appendix N. 


||614.0 Dialysis Water-Distribution Systems. [OSHPD 1, 

2,3,4 & 5] 

614.1 Dialysis water feedlines shall be CPVC (chlorinated 

polyvinyl chloride), PVC (polyvinyl chloride), glass, stainless 

steel, PEX, PVDF (polyvinylidene fluoride), or other material 

|| deemed acceptable by ANSI/AAMI/ISO 23500-2 and sized to 
provide a minimum velocity of 1.5 feet per second (0.46 m/s). 
The piping shall be a singleloop system with or without recir- 
culation. Branches to dialysis machines shall be ' inch (6.4 
mm) inside dimension and take off from the bottom of the main 
feedline. Branch lines may be PFA (perfluoroalkoxy). 


614.2 All piping for multistation or central dialysis units shall 
be rigid where possible. All piping and tubing shall be in a neat 
arrangement. The placement of piping or tubing on the floor is 
not permitted. 


614.3 All valves shall be located in accessible locations. 
614.4 Piping and valves shall be identified according to their 
function. 

614.5 A means of preventing backwashing or flushing of the 


system when one or more stations are in operation shall be pro- 
vided. 


614.6 A continuous audible alarm shall sound at the nurses’ 


station and remote equipment rooms when the minimum veloc- 
ity is not maintained, or if backwashing or flushing is attempted 
while one or more stations are in operation. 

614.7 Water treatment equipment and water used for dialysis 
treatment shall meet the latest edition of American Association 
of Medical Instrumentations (ААМІ)ЛЅО ANSI/AAMI/ISO 
23500-2 and 23500-3, Preparation And Quality Management 
Of Fluids For Haemodialysis And Related Therapies—Part 2: 
Water Treatment Equipment for Hemodialysis Applications And 
Related Therapies and Part 3: Water For Haemodialysis And 
Related Therapies. 


614.8 A diagram of all piping as installed shall be posted at the 
nurses’ station and equipment room of all multistation or cen- 
tral dialysis units. 


615.0 Identification of Potable and Nonpotable Water 
Lines. 


615.1 Uses Not Permitted. 


615.1.1 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Nonpotable water 
shall not be piped for drinking, washing or bathing, wash- 
ing of clothing, cooking, washing of food, washing of cook- 
ing or eating utensils, washing of food preparation or 
processing premises, or other personal service rooms. 
615.2 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Non-potable water sys- 
tems or systems carrying any other non-potable substance 
shall be installed so as to prevent backflow or back-siphonage 
into a potable water system. 
615.3 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Outlets for non-potable 
water, such as water for industrial or fire-fighting purposes, 


162 


shall be posted in a manner understandable to all employees to 
indicate that the water is unsafe and shall not be used for drink- 
ing, washing, cooking or other personal service purposes. 


616.0 Emergency Water Supply. [OSHPD 1] 


616.1 For new acute care hospital buildings submitted after 
the effective date of this code, the hospital shall have an on- 
site water supply sufficient to operate essential hospital util- 
ities and equipment in the acute care hospital building, to 
support 72 hours of continuing operation in the event of an 
emergency. Any general acute care hospital in operation after 
January 1, 2030 shall have an on-site water supply sufficient 
to operate essential hospital utilities and equipment in the 
acute care hospital buildings on the campus with an SPC-3, 
SPC-4, SPC 4D, or SPC-5 rating, to support 72 hours of con- 
tinuing operation in the event of an emergency. See also Cal- 
ifornia Building Code, Part 2, Section 16174. 1.40. 


The emergency water storage capacity shall be computed 
based on an approved Water Conservation/Water Rationing 
Plan to provide for 72 hours of operation, accepted by the 
licensing agency. For acute care hospital facilities or build- 
ings required to meet NPC-5, on-site water supply of not less 
than 150 gallons [567.9 L] [based on 50 gallons/day/bed for 
72 hours] of potable water per licensed bed shall be provided. 
In no event shall the campus on-site water storage capacity 
be less than one tank with at least 5,000 gallons capacity. 


The emergency supply shall have fittings to allow for 
replenishment of the water supply from transportable water 
sources and a means to dispense water to portable containers 
in the event that normal water supply becomes unavailable. 


Exception: With the approval of the Office and the licensing 
agency, hook-ups that allow for the use of transportable 
sources of potable water may be provided in lieu of 72 hours 
of on-site storage if a minimum onsite water supply of potable 
and industrial water is provided, sufficient to support 24 hours 
of operation, without replenishment based on the hospitals 
approved Water Conservation/Water Rationing plan. In no 
event shall the on-site water storage capacity be less than one 
tank with at least 5,000 gallons capacity. This emergency sup- 
ply tank shall have fittings to allow for replenishment of the 
water supply from transportable water sources and a means to 
dispense water to portable containers in the event that nor- 
mal water supply becomes unavailable. 


616.2 The emergency supply of water shall be provided at ade- 
quate pressure using gravity, pressure tanks, or booster pumps. 
Pumps used for this purpose shall be provided with electrical 
power from the on-site emergency power supply system. 


616.3 Storage tank connections and circulation shall be 
designed to limit water stagnation and temperature stratifi- 
cation. Supplemental disinfection and circulation shall be 
provided where the disinfection levels of the public water sup- 
ply are not adequate to maintain minimum levels of disinfec- 
tant for water quality consistent with the facility 5 water 
management program. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 7 - SANITARY DRAINAGE 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 | 1-AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X X X X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX X XX XX XIX X 


sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
701.2(2) 
701.2(2)(a) 
701.2(2)(b) X X XIX|X 
Table 702.1 & Footnote 10 
705.1.2 

05.6.2 

705.9.4 

Table 707.2, Footnote 1 
710.3 

713.4 

717.2 

724.0 

725.0 

726.0 

727.0 X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal 5 adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


X 
X 


“| KK X Xx ж 
KK KK X ж 


“жж ж 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 163 


164 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 7 
SANITARY DRAINAGE 


Part | - Drainage Systems. 


701.0 General. 


701.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materials, 
design, and installation of sanitary drainage systems and 
building sewers. 


701.2 Drainage Piping. Materials for drainage piping shall 
be in accordance with one of the referenced standards in 
Table 701.2 except that: 


(1) No galvanized wrought-iron or galvanized steel pipe 
shall be used underground and shall be kept not less than 
6 inches (152 mm) aboveground. 


(2) ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be 
installed in accordance with applicable standards refer- 
enced in Table 701.2 and the firestop protection require- 
ments in the California Building Code. Except for 
individual single-family dwelling units, materials 
exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame- 
spread index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed 
index of not more than 50, where tested in accordance 
with ASTM E84 or UL 723. Plastic piping installed in 
plenums shall be tested in accordance with all require- 
ments of ASTM E84 or UL 723. Mounting methods, 
supports and sample sizes of materials for testing that are 
not specified in ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be prohib- 
Ited. 


(a) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] ABS and PVC installations are 
limited to not more than two stories of areas of res- 
idential accommodation. 


(b) [OSHPD 1, 2, 3,4 & 5] ABS and PVC installations 
are not allowed. 


(3) No vitrified clay pipe or fittings shall be used above- 
ground or where pressurized by a pump or ejector. They 
shall be kept not less than 12 inches (305 mm) below- 
ground. 


(4) Copper or copper alloy tube for drainage and vent piping 
shall have a weight of not less than that of copper or cop- 
per alloy drainage tube type DWV. 


(5) Stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings shall not be installed 
underground and shall be kept not less than 6 inches (152 
mm) aboveground. 


(6) Cast-iron soil pipe and fittings and the stainless steel cou- 
plings used to join these products shall be listed and 
tested in accordance with standards referenced in Table 
701.2. Such pipe and fittings shall be marked with the 
country of origin, manufacturer's name or registered 
trademark as defined in the product standards, the third 
party certifier's mark, and the class of the pipe or fitting. 

701.3 Drainage Fittings. Materials for drainage fittings 

shall comply with the applicable standards referenced in 

Table 701.2 of the same diameter as the piping served, and 

such fittings shall be compatible with the type of pipe used. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


701.3.1 Screwed Pipe. Fittings on screwed pipe shall 
be of the recessed drainage type. Burred ends shall be 
reamed to the full bore of the pipe. 


701.3.2 Threads. The threads of drainage fittings shall 
be tapped to allow % inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) grade. 


701.3.3 Type. Fittings used for drainage shall be of the 
drainage type, have a smooth interior water-way, and be 
constructed to allow М inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) grade. 


701.4 Continuous Wastes. Continuous wastes and fixture 

tailpieces shall be constructed from the materials specified in 

Section 701.2 for drainage piping, provided, however, that 

such connections where exposed or accessible shall be per- 

mitted to be of seamless drawn brass not less than No. 20 B 

& S Gauge (0.032 inches) (0.8 mm). 

701.5 Lead. (See Chapter 17) Sheet lead shall comply with 

the following: 

(1) For safe pans — not less than 4 pounds per square foot 
(Ib/f?) (19 kg/m?) or Ив of an inch (1.6 mm) thick. 

(2) For flashings or vent terminals — not less than 3 Ib/ft? (15 
kg/m?) or 0.0472 of an inch (1.2 mm) thick. 

(3) Lead bends and lead traps shall be not less than % of an 
inch (3.2 mm) in wall thickness. 

701.6 Caulking Ferrules. Caulking ferrules shall be man- 

ufactured from copper or copper alloy and shall be in accor- 

dance with Table 701.6. 


701.7 Soldering Bushings. Soldering bushings shall be 
of copper or copper alloy and shall be in accordance with 
Table 701.7. 


TABLE 701.6 
CAULKING FERRULES 
INSIDE MINIMUM WEIGHT EACH 
"მითი | DIAMETER | (спев) 

(inches) pounds ounces 
2 2% 4% 1 0 
3 3⁄4 4% 1 12 
4 4% 4% 2 8 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 pound = 0.453 kg, 1 ounce = 0.02834 kg 


TABLE 701.7 


SOLDERING BUSHINGS 


MINIMUM WEIGHT MINIMUM WEIGHT 
PIPE SIZE EACH PIPE SIZE EACH 
(inches) (inches) 
pounds ounces pounds ounces 
11⁄4 0 6 2/5 1 6 
1% 0 8 3 2 0 
2 0 14 4 3 8 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 pound = 0.453 kg, 1 ounce = 0.02834 kg 


702.0 Fixture Unit Equivalents. 


702.1 Trap Size. The unit equivalent of plumbing fixtures 
shown in Table 702.1 shall be based on the size of the trap 


165 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


TABLE 701.2 


MATERIALS FOR DRAIN, WASTE, VENT PIPE AND FITTINGS 


UNDERGROUND 


ABOVEGROUND 


REFERENCED 
MATERIAL VENTPIPE AND | VENTPIPEAND | PIPEANDFITINGS | DARD(S)PIPE | STANDARDIS) 
S DARD(S) PIPE FITTINGS 
FITTINGS FITTINGS 
ABS (Schedule 40) ASME A112.4.4, 
ASTM D2661, 
X X X ASTM D2680* ASTM D2661, 
ASTM D2680* 
Cast-Iron 
sma | Men 
X X X ASTM A888, 3 
CISPI 301 ASTM 6588; 
CISPI 301 
Co-Extruded ABS (Schedule 40) ASME A112.4.4, 
X X X ASTM F628 ASTM D2661, 
ASTM D2680* 
Co-Extruded Composite ASME A112.4.4, 
(Schedule 40) ASTM D2661, 
X X X ASTM F1488 ASTM D2665, 
ASTM F794*, 
ASTM F1866 
Co-Extruded PVC (Schedule 40) ASME A112.4.4, 
ASTM D2665, 
X X X Nus zm ASTM F794*, 
ASTM F1336*, 
ASTM F1866 
Copper and Copper Alloys (Type ASTM B43 
DWV) | 
AINT ASME B16.23, 
X X X ASTM B251, ASME B16.29 
ASTM B302, : 
ASTM B306 
Galvanized Malleable Iron m X = o ASME B16.3 
Galvanized Steel aD X uH ASTM #53 a: 
Polyethylene m x ASTM F714, ти 
АЅТМ Е894 
PVC (Schedule 40) ASTM 01785, ASME A112.4.4, 
ASTM D2665, 
X X X ASTM D2665, S 
ASTM F794* ASTM F794*, 
ASTM F1866 
PVC- (Sewer and Drain) = = x ASTM 02729 | ASTM 02729 
disc i= e x ASTM 03034 | ASTM 03034 
ЕНИ = x =: ASME А112.3.1 | ASME A1123.1 
Stainless Steel 3166 x X X ASME А112.3.1 | ASME A1123.1 
Vitrified Clay (Extra strength) а mu x ASTM C700 ASTM C700 


* For building sewer applications. 


166 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


TABLE 702.1 
DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT VALUES (DFU) 
MINIMUM SIZE TRAP 
PLUMBING APPLIANCES, APPURTENANCES, OR FIXTURES AND TRAT ARME PRIVATE PUBLIC ASSEMBLY? 

Bathtub or Combination Bath/Shower 1% 2.0 2.0 == 

Bidet 1% 1.0 — — 

Bidet 1% 2.0 — — 

Clothes Washer, domestic, standpipe? 2 3.0 3.0 3.0 

Dental Unit, cuspidor 1% — 1.0 1.0 

Dishwasher, domestic, with independent drain? 1% 2.0 2.0 2.0 

Drinking Fountain or Water Cooler 1% 0.5 0.5 1.0 

Food Waste Disposer, commercial 2 mE 3.0 3.0 

Floor Drain, emergency 2 x: 0.0 0.0 

Floor Drain (for additional sizes see Section 702.0) 2 2.0 2.0 2.0 

Shower, single-head trap 2? 2.0 2.0 2.0 

Multi-head, each additional 2 1.0 1.0 1.0 

Lavatory 1% 1.0 1.0 1.0 

Lavatories in sets 1% 2.0 2.0 2.0 

Washfountain 1% — 2.0 2.0 

Washfountain 2 = 3.0 3.0 

Mobilehome or Manufactured Home, trap!” 3 6.0 = = 

Receptor, indirect waste’? 1% See footnote? 

Receptor, indirect waste!“ 2 See footnote! ^ 

Receptor, indirect waste! 3 See footnote! 

Sinks == а == ==, 
Ваг 1% 1.0 == == 
Ваг? 1% — 2.0 2.0 
Clinical 3 mE 6.0 6.0 
Commercial with food waste? 1% = 3.0 3.0 
Exam Room 1% == 1.0 == 
Special Purpose? 1^ 2.0 3.0 3.0 
Special Purpose 2 3.0 4.0 4.0 
Special Purpose 3 — 6.0 6.0 
Kitchen, domestic? : | 1% 20 20 [Ай 
(with or without food waste disposer, dishwasher, or both) 

Laundry? (with or without discharge from a clothes washer) 1% 2.0 2.0 2.0 
Service or Mop Basin 2 — 3.0 3.0 
Service or Mop Basin 3 — 3.0 3.0 
Service, flushing rim 3 — 6.0 6.0 
Wash, each set of faucets — — 2.0 2.0 

Nonwater Urinal with Drain Cleansing Action 2 1.0 1.0 1.0 

Urinal, integral trap 1.0 GPF? 2 2.0 2.0 5.0 

Urinal, integral trap greater than 1.0 GPF 2 2.0 2.0 6.0 

Urinal, exposed trap? 1% 2.0 2.0 5.0 

Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Gravity Tank? 3 3.0 4.0 6.0 

Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Tank? 3 3.0 4.0 6.0 

Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve? 3 3.0 4.0 6.0 

2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 167 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


TABLE 702.1 
DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT VALUES (DFU) (continued) 


MINIMUM SIZE TRAP 
PLUMBING APPLIANCES, APPURTENANCES, OR FIXTURES AND TRAP ARM’ PRIVATE PUBLIC ASSEMBLY? 
(inches) 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Gravity Tank? 3 4.0 6.0 8.0 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valvef 3 4.0 6.0 8.0 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


Notes: 
1 


Provide a 2 inch (50 mm) minimum drain. 
For refrigerators, coffee urns, water stations, and similar low demands. 


of sizing common horizontal and vertical drainage piping. 


For commercial sinks, dishwashers, and similar moderate or heavy demands. 
Buildings having a clothes-washing area with clothes washers in a battery of three or more clothes washers shall be rated at 6 fixture units each for purposes 


Indirect waste receptors shall be sized based on the total drainage capacity of the fixtures that drain thereinto, in accordance with Table 702.2. 


5 Water closets shall be computed as 6 fixture units where determining septic tank sizes based on Appendix H of this code. 
Trap sizes shall not be increased to the point where the fixture discharge is capable of being inadequate to maintain their self-scouring properties. 


j Assembly [Public Use (see Table 422.1)]. 


? For a bathtub to shower retrofit, a 1'/ inch (40 mm) trap and trap arm shall be permitted with a maximum shower size of 36 inches (914 mm) in width and 


60 inches (1524 mm) in length. See Section 408.6 and Section 408.7. 


10 For drainage fixture unit values related to lots within mobilehome parks in all parts of the State of California, see California Code of Regulations, Title 25, 
Division 1, Chapter 2, Article 5, Section 1268. For drainage fixture unit values related to lots within special occupancy parks in all parts of the State of Cal- 
ifornia, see California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 2.2, Article 5, Section 2268. 


required, and the unit equivalent of fixtures and devices not 
shown in Table 702.1 shall be based on the size of trap or trap 
arm. 


Maximum drainage fixture units for a fixture trap and 
trap arm loadings for sizes up to 4 inches (100 mm) shall be 
in accordance with Table 702.1(1). 


TABLE 702.1(1) 
MAXIMUM DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS FOR A 
TRAP AND TRAP ARM* 


SIZE OF TRAP AND DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT 
TRAP ARM (inches) VALUES (DFU) 

1% 1 unit 

1% 3 units 

2 4 units 

3 6 units 

4 8 units 


For SI Units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
* Exception: On self-service laundries. 


702.2 Intermittent Flow. Drainage fixture units for inter- 
mittent flow into the drainage system shall be computed on 
the rated discharge capacity in gallons per minute (gpm) (L/s) 
in accordance with Table 702.2. 


TABLE 702.2 
DISCHARGE CAPACITY IN GALLONS PER MINUTE FOR 
INTERMITTENT FLOW ONLY* 


GPM FIXTURE UNITS 
Up to 7^ Equals 1 Fixture Unit 
Greater than 7% to 15 Equals 2 Fixture Units 
Greater than 15 to 30 Equals 4 Fixture Units 
Greater than 30 to 50 Equals 6 Fixture Units 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 
* Discharge capacity exceeding 50 gallons per minute (3.15 L/s) shall be 
determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


168 


702.3 Continuous Flow. For a continuous flow into a 
drainage system, such as from a pump, sump ejector, air con- 
ditioning equipment, or similar device, 2 fixture units shall 
be equal to each gallon per minute (gpm) (L/s) of flow. 


703.0 Size of Drainage Piping. 


703.1 Minimum Size. The minimum sizes of vertical, hor- 
izontal, or both drainage piping shall be determined from the 
total of fixture units connected thereto, and additionally, in the 
case of vertical drainage pipes, in accordance with their length. 


703.2 Maximum Number of Fixture Units. Table 703.2 
shows the maximum number of fixture units allowed on a 
vertical or horizontal drainage pipe, building drain, or build- 
ing sewer of a given size; the maximum number of fixture 
units allowed on a branch interval of a given size; and the 
maximum length (in feet and meters) of a vertical drainage 
pipe of a given size. 

703.3 Sizing per Appendix C. For alternate method of 
sizing drainage piping, see Appendix C. 


704.0 Fixture Connections (Drainage). 


704.1 Inlet Fittings. Drainage piping shall be provided with 
approved inlet fittings for fixture connections, correctly 
located according to the size and type of fixture proposed to 
be connected. 


704.2 Single Vertical Drainage Pipe. Two fixtures set 
back-to-back, or side-by-side, within the distance allowed 
between a trap and its vent, shall be permitted to be served by 
a single vertical drainage pipe provided that each fixture 
wastes separately into an approved double-fixture fitting hav- 
ing inlet openings at the same level. 

704.3 Commercial Sinks. Pot sinks, scullery sinks, dish- 
washing sinks, silverware sinks, and other similar fixtures 
shall be connected directly to the drainage system. A floor 
drain shall be provided adjacent to the fixture and shall be 
connected on the sewer side of the sink. No other drainage 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


TABLE 703.2 
MAXIMUM UNIT LOADING AND MAXIMUM LENGTH OF DRAINAGE AND VENT PIPING 
SIZE OF PIPE (inches) 1% 1% 2 3 4 5 6 8 10 12 
Maximum Units 
Drainage Piping! 
Vertical 1 227 16 48^ 256 600 1380 3600 5600 8400 
Horizontal 1 17 83 354 2165 4285 7205 26405 46805 82005 
Maximum Length 
Drainage Piping 
Vertical, (feet) 45 65 85 212 300 390 510 750 = = 
Horizontal (unlimited) 
Vent Piping 
Horizontal and Vertical® 
Maximum Units 1 83 24 84 256 600 1380 3600 – - 
Maximum Lengths, (feet) 45 60 120 212 300 390 510 750 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 

Notes: 

Excluding trap arm. 

Except for sinks, urinals, and dishwashers — exceeding 1 fixture unit. 
Except for six-unit traps or water closets. 

Not to exceed six water closets or five six-unit traps. 


Duk шо ა Ke 


Based on М inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) slope. For % of an inch per foot (10.4 mm/m) slope, multiply horizontal fixture units by a factor of 0.8. 
The diameter of an individual vent shall be not less than 1% inches (32 mm) nor less than one-half the diameter of the drain to which it is connected. Fixture 


unit load values for drainage and vent piping shall be computed from Table 702.1 and Table 702.2. Not to exceed one-third of the total permitted length of 
a vent shall be permitted to be installed in a horizontal position. Where vents are increased one pipe size for their entire length, the maximum length limita- 
tions specified in this table do not apply. This table is in accordance with the requirements of Section 901.3. 


E 


line shall be connected between the floor drain waste con- 
nection and the fixture drain. The fixture and floor drain shall 
be trapped and vented in accordance with this code. 


705.0 Joints and Connections. 


705.1 ABS and ABS Co-Extruded Plastic Pipe and 
Joints. Joining methods for ABS plastic pipe and fittings 
shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions and shall comply with Section 
705.1.1 through Section 705.1.3. 


705.1.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be designed to provide a permanent seal and shall be of 
the mechanical or push-on joint. The push-on joint shall 
include an elastomeric gasket that complies with ASTM 
D3212 and shall provide a compressive force against the 
spigot and socket after assembly to provide a permanent 
seal. 


705.1.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement 
joints for ABS pipe and fittings shall be clean from dirt 
and moisture. Pipe shall be cut square and shall be 
deburred. Where surfaces to be joined are cleaned, and 
free of dirt, moisture, oil, and other foreign material, the 
solvent cement that complies with ASTM D2235 shall be 
applied to all joint surfaces. Joints shall be made while 
both the inside socket surface and outside surface of pipe 
are wet with solvent cement. Hold joint in place and 
undisturbed for 1 minute after assembly. [HCD 1 & HCD 
2] Plastic pipe and fittings joined with solvent cement 
shall utilize Low VOC primer(s), if a primer is required, 
and Low VOC cement(s) as defined in Section 214.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Up to 8 public lavatories are permitted to be installed on a 1^ inch (40 mm) vertical branch or horizontal sanitary branch sloped at M inch per foot (20.8 mm/m). 


705.1.3 Threaded Joints. Threads shall comply with 
ASME B1.20.1. A minimum of Schedule 80 shall be per- 
mitted to be threaded. Molded threads on adapter fittings 
for the transition to threaded joints shall be permitted. 
Thread sealant compound shall be applied to male 
threads, insoluble in water, and nontoxic. The joint 
between the pipe and transition fitting shall be of the sol- 
vent cement type. Caution shall be used during assem- 
bly to prevent over tightening of the ABS components 
once the thread sealant compound has been applied. 


705.2 Cast-Iron Pipe and Joints. Joining methods for 
cast-iron pipe and fittings shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions and shall 
comply with Section 705.2.1 or Section 705.2.2. 


705.2.1 Caulked Joints. Caulked joints shall be 
firmly packed with oakum or hemp and filled with 
molten lead to a depth of not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) 
in one continuous pour. The lead shall be caulked thor- 
oughly at the inside and outside edges of the joint. After 
caulking, the finished joint shall not exceed % of an inch 
(3.2 mm) below the rim of the hub. No paint, varnish, or 
other coatings shall be permitted on the joining material 
until after the joint has been tested and approved. 


705.2.2 Mechanical Joints and Compression 
Joints. Mechanical joints for cast-iron pipe and fittings 
shall be of the elastomeric compression type or mechan- 
ical joint couplings. Compression type joints with an 
elastomeric gasket for cast-iron hub and spigot pipe shall 
comply with ASTM C564 and be tested in accordance 
with ASTM C1563. Hub and spigot shall be clean and 


169 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


free of dirt, mud, sand, and foreign materials. Cut pipe 
shall be free from sharp edges. Fold and insert gasket into 
the hub. Lubricate the joint following manufacturer's 
instructions. Insert spigot into hub until the spigot end of 
the pipe bottom out in the hub. Use the same procedure 
for the installation of fittings. 


A mechanical joint shielded coupling type for hub- 
less cast-iron pipe and fittings shall have a metallic shield 
that complies with ASTM A1056, ASTM C1277, ASTM 
C1540, or CISPI 310. The elastomeric gasket shall com- 
ply with ASTM C564. Hubless cast-iron pipe and fittings 
shall be clean and free of dirt, mud, sand, and foreign 
materials. Cut pipe shall be free from sharp edges. Gas- 
ket shall be placed on the end of the pipe or fitting and 
the stainless steel shield and clamp assembly on the end 
of the other pipe or fitting. Pipe or fittings shall be seated 
against the center stop inside the elastomeric sleeve. 
Slide the stainless steel shield and clamp assembly into 
a position centered over the gasket and tighten. Bands 
shall be tightened using an approved calibrated torque 
wrench specifically set by the manufacturer of the cou- 
plings. 


705.3 Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe (DWV) and 
Joints. Joining methods for copper or copper alloy pipe and 
fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions and shall comply with Section 
705.3.1 through Section 705.3.4. 


170 


705.3.1 Brazed Joints. Brazed joints between copper 
or copper alloy pipe and fittings shall be made with braz- 
ing alloys having a liquid temperature above 1000?F 
(538?C). The joint surfaces to be brazed shall be cleaned 
bright by either manual or mechanical means. Piping 
shall be cut square and reamed to full inside diameter. 
Brazing flux shall be applied to the joint surfaces where 
required by manufacturer's recommendation. Brazing 
filler metal shall conform to AWS A5.8 and shall be 
applied at the point where the pipe or tubing enters the 
socket of the fitting. 


705.3.2 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints in cop- 
per or copper alloy piping shall be made with a mechan- 
ical coupling with grooved end piping or approved joint 
designed for the specific application. 

705.3.3 Soldered Joints. Soldered joints between cop- 
per or copper alloy pipe and fittings shall be made in 
accordance with ASTM B828 with the following sequence 
of joint preparation and operation as follows: measuring 
and cutting, reaming, cleaning, fluxing, assembly and sup- 
port, heating, applying the solder, cooling, and cleaning. 
Pipe shall be cut square and reamed to the full inside diam- 
eter including the removal of burrs on the outside of the 
pipe. Surfaces to be joined shall be cleaned bright by man- 
ual or mechanical means. Flux shall be applied to pipe and 
fittings and shall conform to ASTM B813, and shall 
become noncorrosive and nontoxic after soldering. Insert 
pipe into the base of the fitting and remove excess flux. 
Pipe and fitting shall be supported to ensure a uniform cap- 


illary space around the joint. Heat shall be applied using air 
or fuel torch with the flame perpendicular to the pipe using 
acetylene or an LP gas. Preheating shall depend on the size 
of the joint. The flame shall be moved to the fitting cup 
and alternate between the pipe and fitting. Solder con- 
forming to ASTM B32 shall be applied to the joint sur- 
faces until capillary action draws the molten solder into 
the cup. Joint surfaces shall not be disturbed until cool, 
and any remaining flux residue shall be cleaned. 


705.3.4 Threaded Joints. Threaded joints for copper 
or copper alloy pipe shall be made with pipe threads that 
comply with ASME B1.20.1. Thread sealant tape or 
compound shall be applied only to male threads, and 
such material shall be approved types, insoluble in water, 
and nontoxic. 


705.4 Galvanized Steel Pipe and Joints. Joining meth- 
ods for galvanized steel pipe and fittings shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 705.4.1 or Section 705.4.2. 


705.4.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be made with an elastomeric gasket. 


705.4.2 Threaded Joints. Threaded joints shall be 
made with pipe threads that comply with ASME B1.20.1. 
Thread sealant tape or compound shall be applied only to 
male threads, and such material shall be of approved 
types, insoluble in water, and nontoxic. 


705.5 Polyethylene (PE) Sewer Pipe. Polyethylene (PE) 
sewer pipe or tubing and fitting joining methods shall be 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions and shall comply with Section 705.5.1 through 
Section 705.5.1.3. 


705.5.1 Heat-Fusion Joints. Heat-fusion joints 
between PE sewer pipe or tubing and fittings shall be 
assembled in accordance with Section 705.5.1.1 through 
Section 705.5.1.3 using butt-fusion, electro-fusion, or 
socket-fusion heat methods. Do not disturb the joint until 
cooled to ambient temperature. 


705.5.1.1 Butt-Fusion Joints. Butt-fusion joints 
for PE pipe shall be installed in accordance with 
ASTM F2620 and shall be made by heating the pre- 
pared ends of two pipes, pipe and fitting, or two fit- 
tings by holding ends against a heated element. The 
heated element shall be removed when the required 
melt or times are obtained and heated ends shall be 
placed together with applied force. Do not disturb 
the joint until cooled to ambient temperature. 


705.5.1.2 Electro-Fusion Joints. Electro-fusion 
joints shall be heated internally by a conductor at the 
interface of the joint. Fittings shall comply with 
ASTM F1055 for the performance requirements of 
polyethylene electro-fusion fittings. The specified 
electro-fusion cycle used to form the joint requires 
consideration of the properties of the materials being 
joined, the design of the fitting being used, and the 
environmental conditions. Align and restrain fitting 
to pipe to prevent movement and apply electric cur- 
rent to the fitting. Turn off the current when the 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


required time has elapsed to heat the joint. Do not 
disturb the joint until cooled to ambient temperature. 


705.5.1.3 Socket-Fusion Joints. Socket fusion 
joints shall be installed in accordance with ASTM 
F2620 and shall be made by simultaneously heating 
the outside surface of a pipe end and the inside ofa 
fitting socket. Where the required melt is obtained, 
the pipe and fitting shall be joined by inserting one 
into the other with applied force. Do not disturb the 
joint until cooled to ambient temperature. 


705.6 PVC and PVC Co-Extruded Plastic Pipe and 
Joining Methods. Joining methods for PVC plastic pipe 
and fittings shall be installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions and shall comply with Sec- 
tion 705.6.1 through Section 705.6.3. 


705.6.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be designed to provide a permanent seal and shall be of 
the mechanical or push-on joint type. The push-on joint 
shall include an elastomeric gasket that complies with 
ASTM D3212 and shall provide a compressive force 
against the spigot and socket after assembly to provide a 
permanent seal. 


705.6.2 Solvent Cement Joints. Solvent cement 
joints for PVC pipe and fittings shall be clean from dirt 
and moisture. Pipe shall be cut square, and pipe shall be 
deburred. Where surfaces to be joined are cleaned and 
free of dirt, moisture, oil, and other foreign material, 
apply primer purple in color that complies with ASTM 
F656. Primer shall be applied to the surface of the pipe 
and fitting 1s softened. Solvent cement that comply with 
ASTM D2564 shall be applied to all joint surfaces. Joints 
shall be made while both the inside socket surface and 
outside surface of pipe are wet with solvent cement. Hold 
joint in place and undisturbed for 1 minute after assem- 
bly. [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Plastic pipe and fittings joined 
with solvent cement shall utilize Low VOC primer(s), if a 
primer is required, and Low VOC cement(s) as defined in 
Section 214.0. 


705.6.3 Threaded Joints. Threads shall comply with 
ASME B1.20.1. A minimum of Schedule 80 shall be per- 
mitted to be threaded. Molded threads on adapter fittings 
for the transition to threaded joints shall be permitted. 
Thread sealant compound that is compatible with the 
pipe and fitting, insoluble in water and nontoxic shall be 
applied to male threads. The joint between the pipe and 
transition fitting shall be ofthe solvent cement type. Cau- 
tion shall be used during assembly to prevent over tight- 
ening of the PVC components once the thread sealant has 
been applied. Female PVC threaded fittings shall be used 
with plastic male threads only. 


705.7 Stainless Steel Pipe and Joints. Joining meth- 
ods for stainless steel pipe and fittings shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 705.7.1 or Section 705.7.2. 


705.7.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints 
between stainless steel pipe and fittings shall be of the 
compression, grooved coupling, hydraulic press-connect 
fittings, or flanged. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


705.72 Welded Joints. Welded joints between stain- 
less steel pipe and fittings shall be made in accordance 
with ASME A112.3.1 and shall be welded autogenously. 
Pipe shall be cleaned, free of scale and contaminating 
particles. Pipe shall be cut with a combination cutting 
and beveling tool that provides a square cut, and free of 
burrs. Mineral oil lubricant shall be used during the cut- 
ting and beveling process. 


705.8 Vitrified Clay Pipe and Joints. Joining methods 
for vitrified clay pipe and fittings shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and 
shall comply with Section 705.8.1. 


705.8.1 Mechanical Joints. Mechanical joints shall 
be designed to provide a permanent seal and shall be of 
the mechanical or push-on joint type. The push-on joint 
shall include an elastomeric gasket that complies with 
ASTM C425 and shall provide a compressive force 
against the spigot and socket after assembly to provide a 
permanent seal. 


705.9 Special Joints. Special joints shall comply with Sec- 
tion 705.9.1 through Section 705.9.4. 


705.9.1 Slip Joints. In fixture drains and traps, slip 
joints of approved materials shall be permitted to be used 
in accordance with their approvals. 


705.9.2 Expansion Joints. Expansion joints shall be 
accessible, except where in vent piping or drainage 
stacks, and shall be permitted to be used where neces- 
sary to provide for expansion and contraction of the 
pipes. 

705.9.3 Ground Joint, Flared, or Ferrule Con- 
nections. Copper or copper alloy ground joint flared, or 
ferrule-type connections that allow adjustment of tubing, 
but provide a rigid joint where made up, shall not be con- 
sidered as slip joints. 


705.9.4 Transition Joint. A solvent cement transition 
joint between ABS and PVC building drain and building 
sewer shall be made using listed transition solvent 
cement in accordance with ASTM D3138. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] Plastic pipe and fittings joined with 
solvent cement shall utilize Low VOC primer(s), if a 
primer is required, and Low VOC cement(s) as defined in 
Section 214.0. 
705.10 Joints Between Various Materials. Joints 
between various materials shall be installed in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions and with Sec- 
tion 705.10.1 through Section 705.10.4. Mechanical cou- 
plings used to join different materials shall comply with 
ASTM C1173 for belowground use, ASTM C1460 for above- 
ground use, or ASTM C1461 for aboveground and below- 
ground use. 


705.10.1 Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe to Cast- 
Iron Pipe. Joints from copper or copper alloy pipe or 
tubing to cast-iron pipe shall be made with a listed com- 
pression-type joint or copper alloy ferrule. The copper 
or copper alloy pipe or tubing shall be soldered or brazed 
to the ferrule, and the ferrule shall be joined to the cast- 
iron hub by a compression or caulked joint. 


171 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


705.10.2 Copper or Copper Alloy Pipe to 
Threaded Pipe Joints. Joints from copper or copper 
alloy pipe or tubing to threaded pipe shall be made by 
the use of a listed copper alloy adapter or dielectric fit- 
ting. The joint between the copper or copper alloy pipe 
and the fitting shall be a soldered or brazed, and the con- 
nection between the threaded and the fittings shall be 
made with a standard pipe size threaded joint. 


705.10.3 Plastic Pipe to Other Materials. Where 
connecting plastic pipe to other types of plastic or other 
types of piping material; approved listed adapter or tran- 
sition fittings and listed for the specific transition 
intended shall be used. Except as provided in Section 
705.9.4, PVC and ABS pipe and fittings shall not be sol- 
vent welded to any other unlike material. 


705.10.4 Stainless Steel Pipe to Other Materials. 
Where connecting stainless steel pipe to other types of 
piping, listed mechanical joints of the compression type 
and listed for the specific transition intended shall be 
used. 


706.0 Changes in Direction of Drainage Flow. 


706.1 Approved Fittings. Changes in the direction of 
drainage piping shall be made by the appropriate use of 
approved fittings and shall be of the angles presented by a 
one-sixteenth bend, one-eighth bend, or one-sixth bend, or 
other approved fittings of equivalent sweep. 


706.2 Horizontal to Vertical. Horizontal drainage lines, 
connecting with a vertical stack, shall enter through 45 degree 
I (0.79 rad) wye branches, 60 degree (1.05 rad) wye branches, 
combination wye and one-eighth bend branches, sanitary tee 
or sanitary tapped tee branches, or other approved fittings of 
equivalent sweep. No fitting having more than one inlet at the 
same level shall be used unless such fitting is constructed so 
that the discharge from one inlet cannot readily enter any 
other inlet. Double sanitary tees shall be permitted to be used 
where the barrel of the fitting is not less than two pipe sizes 
larger than the largest inlet, (pipe sizes recognized for this 
purpose are 2 inches, 2% inches, 3 inches, 31⁄2 inches, 4 
inches, 4% inches, 5 inches, 6 inches, etc.) (50 mm, 65 mm, 
80 mm, 90 mm, 100 mm, 115 mm, 125 mm, 150 mm, etc.). 


706.3 Horizontal to Horizontal. Horizontal drainage lines 
connecting with other horizontal drainage lines shall enter 
through 45 degree (0.79 rad) wye branches, combination wye 
and one-eighth bend branches, or other approved fittings of 
equivalent sweep. 


706.4 Vertical to Horizontal. Vertical drainage lines con- 
necting with horizontal drainage lines shall enter through 45 
degree (0.79 rad) wye branches, combination wye and one- 
eighth bend branches, or other approved fittings of equivalent 
sweep. Branches or offsets of 60 degrees (1.05 rad) shall be 
permitted to be used where installed in a true vertical position. 


707.0 Cleanouts. 


707.1 Plug. Each cleanout fitting for cast-iron pipe shall con- 
sist of a cast-iron or copper alloy body and an approved plug. 
Each cleanout for galvanized wrought iron, galvanized steel, 


172 


copper, or copper alloy pipe shall consist of a plug as speci- 
fied in Table 707.1, or a standard weight copper alloy cap, or 
an approved ABS or PVC plastic plug, or an approved stain- 
less steel cleanout or plug. Plugs shall have raised square 


heads or approved countersunk rectangular slots. 


TABLE 707.1 
CLEANOUTS 
SIZE OF PIPE SIZE OF CLEANOUT THREADS 
(inches) (inches) (per inches) 
1% 1% 11% 
2 1% 11% 
2% 2% 8 
3 2” 8 
4 & larger 3^ 8 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


707.2 Approved. Each cleanout fitting and each cleanout 
plug or cap shall be of an approved type. A list of approved 
standards for cleanouts are referenced in Table 707.2. 


TABLE 7072 
CLEANOUT MATERIALS FOR DRAIN, WASTE, AND VENT 
MATERIAL STANDARD 
ABS! ASTM D2661, CSA B79, 
IAPMO IGC 78, IAPMO IGC 224 
Cast Iron ASME A112.36.2M, ASTM A888, 
CISPI 301, CSA B79, 
IAPMO IGC 224 
Copper or Copper Alloy ASME A112.36.2M, CSA B79 
Ductile Iron CSA B79 
Elastomers CSA B79, IAPMO PS 90 
Polyethylene (PE) CSA B79 
Polypropylene (PP) CSA B79 
PVC! ASTM D2665, CSA B79, 
IAPMO IGC 78, IAPMO IGC 224 
Polyvinylidene Fluoride CSA B79 
(PVDF) 
Stainless Steel CSA B79 


1 [HCD 1 & HCD 2] ABS and PVC installations are limited to not more 
than two stories of areas of residential accommodation. 


7073 Watertight and Gastight. Cleanouts shall be 
designed to be watertight and gastight. 


707.4 Location. Each horizontal drainage pipe shall be pro- 
vided with a cleanout at its upper terminal, and each run of 
piping, that is more than 100 feet (30 480 mm) in total devel- 
oped length, shall be provided with a cleanout for each 100 
feet (30 480 mm), or fraction thereof, in length of such pip- 
ing. An additional cleanout shall be provided in a drainage 
line for each aggregate horizontal change in direction exceed- 
ing 135 degrees (2.36 rad). A cleanout shall be installed above 
the fixture connection fitting, serving each urinal, regardless 
of the location of the urinal in the building. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Exceptions: 


(1) Cleanouts shall be permitted to be omitted on a horizon- 
tal drain line less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in length unless 
such line is serving sinks or urinals. 


(2) Cleanouts shall be permitted to be omitted on a horizon- 
tal drainage pipe installed on a slope of 72 degrees (1.26 
rad) or less from the vertical angle (one-fifth bend). 


(3) Excepting the building drain, its horizontal branches, 
kitchen sinks, and urinals, a cleanout shall not be 
required on a pipe or piping that is above the floor level 
of the lowest floor of the building. 


(4) An approved type of two-way cleanout fitting, installed 
inside the building wall near the connection between the 
building drain and the building sewer or installed outside 
of a building at the lower end of a building drain and 
extended to grade, shall be permitted to be substituted 
for an upper terminal cleanout. 


707.4.1 Load Rated Cover. Cleanout floor covers and 
top rims meant to take loads shall be rated for the load- 
ing in accordance with ASME A112.36.2M. 


707.5 Cleaning. Each cleanout shall be installed so that it 
opens to allow cleaning in the direction of flow of the soil or 
waste or at right angles thereto and, except in the case of wye 
branch and end-of-line cleanouts, shall be installed vertically 
above the flow line of the pipe. 


707.6 Extension. Each cleanout extension shall be consid- 
ered as drainage piping and each 90 degree (1.57 rad) 
cleanout extension shall be extended from a wye-type fitting 
or other approved fitting of equivalent sweep. 


707.7 Interceptor. Each cleanout for an interceptor shall be 
outside of such interceptor. 


7078 Access. Each cleanout, unless installed under an 
approved cover plate, shall be above grade, readily accessible, 
and so located as to serve the purpose for which it is intended. 
Cleanouts located under cover plates shall be so installed as 
to provide the clearances and accessibility required by this 
section. 


707.9 Clearance. Each cleanout in piping 2 inches (50 mm) 
or less in size shall be so installed that there 1s a clearance of 
not less than 18 inches (457 mm) by 18 inches (457 mm) in 
front of the cleanout. Cleanouts in piping exceeding 2 inches 
(50 mm) shall have a clearance of not less than 24 inches (610 
mm) by 24 inches (610 mm) in front of the cleanout. 
Cleanouts in under-floor piping shall be extended to or above 
the finished floor or shall be extended outside the building 
where there is less than 18 inches (457 mm) vertical overall, 
allowing for obstructions such as ducts, beams, and piping, 
and 30 inches of (762 mm) horizontal clearance from the 
means of access to such cleanout. No under-floor cleanout 
shall be located exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm) from an access 
door, trap door, or crawl hole. 


707.10 Fittings. Cleanout fittings shall be not less in size 
than those given in Table 707.1. 


707.11 Pressure Drainage Systems. Cleanouts shall be 
provided for pressure drainage systems as classified under 
Section 710.7. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


707.12 Countersunk Cleanout Plugs. Countersunk 
cleanout plugs shall be installed where raised heads cause a 
hazard. 


707.13 Hubless Blind Plugs. Where a hubless blind plug 
is used for a required cleanout, the complete coupling and 
plug shall be accessible for removal or replacement. 


707.14 Trap Arms. Cleanouts for trap arms shall be installed 
in accordance with Section 1002.3. 


708.0 Grade of Horizontal Drainage Piping. 


708.1 General. Building drain and other horizontal drainage | 
piping shall be run in practical alignment and a uniform slope 
of not less than 4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) or 2 percent 
toward the point of disposal. 


Where it is impractical due to the depth of the street 
sewer, structural features, or to the arrangement ofa building 
or structure to obtain a slope of /4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m) 
or 2 percent, building drain piping 4 inches (100 mm) or | 
larger in diameter shall be permitted to have a slope of not 
less than ¥ inch per foot (10.4 mm/m) or 1 percent, when first | 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


709.0 Gravity Drainage Required. 


709.1 General. Where practicable, plumbing fixtures shall 
be drained to the public sewer or private sewage disposal sys- 
tem by gravity. 


710.0 Drainage of Fixtures Located Below the Next 
Upstream Manhole or Below the Main Sewer Level. 


710.1 Backflow Protection. Fixtures installed on a floor 
level that is lower than the next upstream manhole cover of 
the public, or private sewer shall be protected from backflow 
of sewage by installing an approved type of backwater valve. 
Fixtures on such floor level that are not below the next 
upstream manhole cover shall not be required to be protected 
by a backwater valve. Fixtures on floor levels above such ele- 
vation shall not discharge through the backwater valve. | 
Cleanouts for drains that pass through a backwater valve shall 
be clearly identified with a permanent label stating “backwa- 
ter valve downstream." 
710.2 Sewage Discharge. Drainage piping serving fix- 
tures that are located below the crown level of the main sewer 
shall discharge into an approved watertight sump or receiving 
tank, so located as to receive the sewage or wastes by grav- 
ity. From such sump or receiving tank, the sewage or other 
liquid wastes shall be lifted and discharged into the building 
drain or building sewer by approved ejectors, pumps, or other 
equally efficient approved mechanical devices. 
710.3 Sewage Ejector and Pumps. A sewage ejector or 
sewage pump receiving the discharge of water closets or uri- 
nals: 
(1) Shall have a discharge capacity of not less than 20 gpm 
(1.26 L/s). 
(2) In single dwelling units, the ejector or pump shall be 
capable of passing an 1% inch (38 mm) diameter solid 
ball, and the discharge piping of each ejector or pump 


173 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


shall have a backwater valve and gate valve, and be not 
less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter. 


(3) In other than single-dwelling units, the ejector or pump 
shall be capable of passing a 2 inch (51 mm) diameter 
solid ball, and the discharge piping of each ejector or 
pump shall have a backwater valve and gate valve, and 
be not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] The minimum size of any pump or any 
discharge pipe from a sump having a water closet connected 
thereto shall be not less than 2 inches (50 mm). 


710.4 Discharge Line. The discharge line from such ejec- 
tor, pump, or another mechanical device shall be of approved 
pressure rated material and be provided with an accessible 
backwater or swing check valve and gate or ball valve. Where 
the gravity drainage line to which such discharge line con- 
nects is horizontal, the method of connection shall be from 
the top through a wye branch fitting. The gate or ball valve 
shall be located on the discharge side of the backwater or 
check valve. 


Gate or ball valves, where installed in drainage piping, 
shall be fullway type with working parts of corrosion-resistant 
metal. Sizes 4 inches (100 mm) or more in diameter shall 
have cast-iron bodies and sizes less than 4 inches (100 mm), 
cast-iron or copper alloy bodies. 


710.5 Size of Building Drains and Sewers. Building 
drains or building sewers receiving a discharge from a pump 
or ejector shall be adequately sized to prevent overloading. 
Two fixture units shall be allowed for each gallon per minute 
(L/s) of flow. 


710.6 Backwater Valves. Backwater valves, gate valves, 
fullway ball valves, unions, motors, compressors, air tanks, 
and other mechanical devices required by this section shall 
be located where they will be accessible for inspection and 
repair and, unless continuously exposed, shall be enclosed in 
a masonry pit fitted with an adequately sized removable 
cover. 


Backwater valves shall comply with ASME A112.14.1 
| or IAPMO IGC 305, and have bodies of cast-iron, plastic, 
copper alloy, or other approved materials; shall have noncor- 
rosive bearings, seats, and self-aligning discs; and shall be 
constructed to ensure a positive mechanical seal. Such back- 
water valves shall remain open during periods of low flows to 
avoid screening of solids and shall not restrict capacities or 
cause excessive turbulence during peak loads. Unless other- 
wise listed, valve access covers shall be bolted type with gas- 
ket, and each valve shall bear the manufacturer’s name cast 
into the body and the cover. 


710.7 Drainage and Venting Systems. The drainage and 
venting systems, in connection with fixtures, sumps, receiv- 
ing tanks, and mechanical waste-lifting devices shall be 
installed under the same requirements as provided for in this 
code for gravity systems. 


710.8 Sump and Receiving Tank Construction. Sumps 
and receiving tanks shall be watertight and shall be con- 
structed of concrete, metal, or other approved materials. 
Where constructed of poured concrete, the walls and bottom 
shall be adequately reinforced and designed to recognized 
acceptable standards. Metal sumps or tanks shall be of such 


174 


thickness as to serve their intended purpose and shall be 
treated internally and externally to resist corrosion. 


710.9 Alarm. Such sumps and receiving tanks shall be auto- 
matically discharged and, wherein a “public use” occupancy, 
shall be provided with dual pumps or ejectors arranged to 
function alternately in normal use and independently. Such 
pumps shall be capable of running continuously in case of 
overload or mechanical failure of one of the pumps or ejec- 
tors. The pumps shall have an audio and visual alarm, read- 
ily accessible, that signals pump failure or an overload 
condition. The lowest inlet shall have a clearance of not less 
than 2 inches (51 mm) from the high-water or “starting” level 
of the sump. 


710.10 Sump and Receiving Tank Covers and Vents. 
Sumps and receiving tanks shall be provided with substantial 
covers having a bolt-and-gasket-type manhole or equivalent 
opening to permit access for inspection, repairs, and cleaning. 
The top shall be provided with a vent pipe that shall extend 
separately through the roof or, where permitted, be combined 
with other vent pipes. Such vent shall be large enough to main- 
tain atmospheric pressure within the sump under normal oper- 
ating conditions and, in no case, shall be less in size than that 
required by Table 703.2 for the number and type of fixtures 
discharging into the sump, nor less than 1% inches (40 mm) in 
diameter. Where the preceding requirements are met and the 
vent, after leaving the sump, is combined with vents from fix- 
tures discharging into the sump, the size of the combined vent 
need not exceed that required for the total number of fixtures 
discharging into the sump. No vent from an air-operating 
sewage ejector shall combine with other vents. 


710.11 Air Tanks. Air tanks shall be so proportioned as to be 
of equal cubical capacity to the ejectors connected in addi- 
tion to that in which there shall be maintained an air pressure 
of not less than 2 pounds per foot (Ib/ft) (3 kg/m) of height the 
sewage is to be raised. No water-operated ejectors shall be 
permitted. 


710.12 Grinder Pump Ejector. Grinder pumps shall be 
permitted to be used. 


710.12.1 Discharge Piping. The discharge piping 
shall be sized in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
installation instructions and shall be not less than 1% 
inches (32 mm) in diameter. A check valve and fullway- 
type shutoff valve shall be located on the discharge line. 


710.13 Macerating Toilet Systems and Pumped 
Waste Systems. Fixtures shall be permitted to discharge 
to a macerating toilet system, or pumped waste system shall 
be permitted as an alternate to a sewage pump system where 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Such systems 
shall comply with ASME A112.3.4/CSA B45.9 and shall be 
installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions. 
710.13.1 Sumps. The sump shall be watertight and 
gastight. 
710.13.2 Discharge Piping. The discharge piping 
shall be sized in accordance with manufacturer’s instruc- 
tions and shall be not less than % of an inch (20 mm) in 
diameter. The developed length of the discharge piping 
shall not exceed the manufacturer's instructions. A check 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


valve and fullway-type shutoff valve shall be located 
within the discharge line or internally within the device. 


710.13.3 Venting. The plumbing fixtures that discharge 
into the macerating device shall be vented in accordance 
with this code. The sump shall be vented in accordance 
with the manufacturer's instructions, and such vent shall 
be permitted to connect to the fixture venting. 


711.0 Suds Relief. 


711.1 General. Drainage connections shall not be made into 
a drainage piping system within 8 feet (2438 mm) of a verti- 
cal to horizontal change of direction of a stack containing 
suds-producing fixtures. Bathtubs, laundries, washing 
machine standpipes, kitchen sinks, and dishwashers shall be 
considered suds-producing fixtures. Where parallel vent 
stacks are required, they shall connect to the drainage stack at 
a point 8 feet (2438 mm) above the lowest point of the 
drainage stack. 


Exceptions: 

(1) Single-family residences. 

(2) Stacks receiving the discharge from less than three sto- 
ries of plumbing fixtures. 


712.0 Testing. 


712.1 Media. The piping of the plumbing, drainage, and vent- 
ing systems shall be tested with water or air except that plastic 
pipe shall not be tested with air. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall be permitted to require the removal of cleanouts, 
etc., to ascertain whether the pressure has reached all parts of 
the system. After the plumbing fixtures have been set and their 
traps filled with water, they shall be submitted to a final test. 


712.2 Water Test. The water test shall be applied to the 
drainage and vent systems either in its entirety or in sections. 
Where the test is applied to the entire system, openings in the 
piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and 
the system filled with water to the point of overflow. Where 
the system is tested in sections, each opening shall be tightly 
plugged, except the highest opening of the section under test, 
and each section shall be filled with water, but no section shall 
be tested with less than a 10 foot head of water (30 kPa). In 
testing successive sections, not less than the upper 10 feet 
(3048 mm) of the next preceding section shall be tested, so 
that no joint or pipe in the building (except the uppermost 10 
feet (3048 mm) of the system) shall have been submitted to a 
test of less than a 10 foot head of water (30 kPa). The water 
shall be kept in the system, or in the portion under test, for not 
less than 15 minutes before inspection starts. The system shall 
then be tight at all points. 


712.3 Air Test. The air test shall be made by attaching an 
air compressor testing apparatus to a suitable opening and, 
after closing all other inlets and outlets to the system, forcing 
air into the system until there is a uniform gauge pressure of 
5 pounds-force per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) or sufficient to 
balance a column of mercury 10 inches (34 kPa) in height. 
The pressure shall be held without the introduction of addi- 
tional air for a period of not less than 15 minutes. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


Part Il - Building Sewers. 


713.0 Sewer Required. 


713.1 Where Required. A building in which plumbing fix- 
tures are installed and premises having drainage piping 
thereon shall have a connection to a public or private sewer, 
except as provided in Section 713.2, and Section 713.4. 


713.2 Private Sewage Disposal System. Where no pub- 
lic sewer intended to serve a lot or premises is available in a 
thoroughfare or right of way abutting such lot or premises, 
drainage piping from a building or works shall be connected 
to a private sewage disposal system as approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. See Appendix H. 


713.3 Public Sewer. Within the limits prescribed by Sec- 
tion 713.4 hereof, the rearrangement or subdivision into 
smaller parcels of a lot that abuts and 1s served by a public 
sewer shall not be deemed cause to permit the construction of 
a private sewage disposal system, and plumbing or drainage 
systems on a smaller parcel or parcels shall connect to the 
public sewer. 


713.4 Public Sewer Availability. The public sewer shall 
be permitted to be considered as not being available where 
such public sewer or a building or an exterior drainage facil- 
ity connected thereto is located more than 200 feet (60 960 
mm) from a proposed building or exterior drainage facility on 
a lot or premises that abut and is served by such public sewer. 
[HCD 1] For residential occupancies, the public sewer may 
be considered as not being available by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


713.5 Permit. No permit shall be issued for the installation, 
alteration, or repair of a private sewage disposal system, or 
part thereof, on a lot for which a connection with a public 
sewer is available. 


713.6 Lot. On every lot or premises hereafter connected to 
a public sewer, plumbing, and drainage systems or parts 
thereof on such lot or premises shall be connected with such 
public sewer. 


713.7 Installation. In cities, counties, or both where the 
installation of building sewers is under the jurisdiction of a 
department other than the Authority Having Jurisdiction, the 
provisions of this code relating to building sewers need not 
apply. 

Exception: Single-family dwellings and buildings or struc- 
tures accessory thereto, existing and connected to an approved 
private sewage disposal system prior to the time of connecting 
the premises to the public sewer shall be permitted, where no 
hazard, nuisance, or insanitary condition is evidenced, and 
written permission has been obtained from the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, remain connected to such properly maintained 
private sewage disposal system where there is insufficient 
grade or fall to permit drainage to the sewer by gravity. 


714.0 Damage to Public Sewer or Private Sewage 
Disposal System. 


714.1 Unlawful Practices. It shall be unlawful for a per- 
son to deposit, by means whatsoever, into a plumbing fixture, 
floor drain, interceptor, sump, receptor, or device which is 


175 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


connected to a drainage system, public sewer, private sewer, 
septic tank, or cesspool, ashes; cinders; solids; rags; flamma- 
ble, poisonous, or explosive liquids or gases; oils; grease; and 
whatsoever that 1s capable of causing damage to the public 
sewer, private sewer, or private sewage disposal system. 


714.2 Prohibited Water Discharge. No rain, surface, or 
subsurface water shall be connected to or discharged into a 
drainage system unless first approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

714.3 Prohibited Sewer Connection. No cesspool, sep- 
tic tank, seepage pit, or drain field shall be connected to a 
public sewer or to a building sewer leading to such public 
sewer. 


714.4 Commercial Food Waste Disposer. The Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction shall review before approval, the 
installation of a commercial food waste disposer connecting 
to a private sewage disposal system. 


714.5 Tanks. An approved type, watertight sewage or waste- 
water holding tank, the contents of which, due to their char- 
acter, shall be periodically removed and disposed of at some 
approved off-site location, shall be installed where required 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction or the Health Officer to 
prevent anticipated surface or subsurface contamination or 
pollution, damage to the public sewer, or other hazardous or 
nuisance conditions. 


715.0 Building Sewer Materials. 


715.1 Materials. The building sewer, beginning 2 feet (610 
mm) from a building or structure, shall be of such materials 
as prescribed in this code. 


715.2 Joining Methods and Materials. Joining methods 
and materials shall be as prescribed in this code. 


715.3 Existing Sewers. Where permitted by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction, trenchless methods of rehabilitation of 
existing building sewer and building storm sewers shall be 
installed in accordance with Section 715.3.1 or Section 715.3.2. 


715.3.1 Sewer Pipe Lining. For trenchless installa- 
tion of resin-impregnated flexible tubing to line existing 
building sewers and building storm sewers installation 
shall be in accordance with ASTM F1216, ASTM 
F2561, ASTM F2599, or ASTM F3240. 


715.3.2 Sewer Pipe Replacement. For trenchless 
installation of polyethylene (PE) pipe using the pipe 
bursting method to replace existing building sewers and 
building storm sewers materials shall be in accordance 
with ASTM F714. 


716.0 Markings. 


716.1 General. Pipe, brick, block, prefabricated septic 
tanks, prefabricated septic tank or seepage pit covers, or other 
parts or appurtenances incidental to the installation of build- 
ing sewers or private sewage disposal systems shall be in 
accordance with the approval requirements of Chapter 3 of 
this code. 


176 


717.0 Size of Building Sewers. 


7171 General. The minimum size of a building sewer shall 
be determined on the basis of the total number of fixture units 
drained by such sewer, in accordance with Table 717.1. No 
building sewer shall be smaller than the building drain. 


For alternate methods of sizing building sewers, see 
Appendix C. 


TABLE 717.1 
MAXIMUM/MINIMUM FIXTURE UNIT LOADING 
ON BUILDING SEWER PIPING* 


SLOPE 
SIZE d PIPE (inches per foot) 
es 
(inches) Tas 1% Л 


(As specified in Table 703.2/ 


УЕ No minimum loading) 


8 1950/1500 2800/625 3900/275 
10 3400/1600 4900/675 6800/300 
12 5600/1700 8000/725 11 200/325 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m 
* See also Appendix H, Private Sewage Disposal Systems. For alternate 
methods of sizing drainage piping, see Appendix C. 


717.2 Meat and Poultry Processing Plants. [AGR] The 
sewer system shall have the capacity to remove all waste from 
the various processing and cleaning operations and to mini- 
mize or prevent stoppage and surcharging at the system. 


718.0 Grade, Support, and Protection of Building 
Sewers. 


718.1 Slope. Building sewers shall be run in practical align- 
ment and at a uniform slope of not less than М inch per foot 
(20.8 mm/m) toward the point of disposal. 


Exception: Where approved by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction and where it 1s impractical, due to the depth of the 
street sewer, the structural features or the arrangement of a | 
building or structure, to obtain a slope of М inch per foot (20.8 
mm/m), piping 4 inches (100 mm) through 6 inches (150 mm) | 
shall be permitted to have a slope of not less than % inch per 
foot (10.4 mm/m) and piping 8 inches (200 mm) and larger | 
shall be permitted to have a slope of not less than Ив inch per 
foot (5.2 mm/m). The maximum and minimum fixture unit 
loading shall be in accordance with Table 717.1. 


718.2 Support. Building sewer piping shall be laid on a firm 
bed throughout its entire length, and such piping laid in made 
or filled-in ground shall be laid on a bed of approved materi- 
als and shall be properly supported as required by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. 

718.3 Protection from Damage. No building sewer or 
other drainage piping or part thereof, which is constructed of 
materials other than those approved for use under or within a 
building, shall be installed under or within 2 feet (610 mm) of 
a building or structure, or part thereof, nor less than 1 foot 
(305 mm) below the surface of the ground. The provisions of 
this subsection include structures such as porches and steps, 
whether covered or uncovered; breezeways; roofed porte 
cochere; roofed patios; carports; covered walks; covered 
driveways; and similar structures or appurtenances. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


719.0 Cleanouts. 


719.1 Locations. Cleanouts shall be placed inside the build- 
ing near the connection between the building drain and the 
building sewer or installed outside the building at the lower 
end of the building drain and extended to grade. 


Additional building sewer cleanouts shall be installed at 
intervals not to exceed 100 feet (30 480 mm) in straight runs 
and for each aggregate horizontal change in direction exceed- 
ing 135 degrees (2.36 rad). 


719.2 No Additional Cleanouts. Where a building sewer 
or a branch thereof does not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) in 
length and is a straight-line projection from a building drain 
that is provided with a cleanout, no cleanout will be required 
at its point of connection to the building drain. 


719.3 Building Sewer Cleanouts. Required building 
sewer cleanouts shall be extended to grade and shall be in 
accordance with the appropriate sections of cleanouts, Sec- 
tion 707.0, for sizing, construction, and materials. Where 
building sewers are located under buildings, the cleanout 
requirements of Section 707.0 shall apply. 


719.4 Cleaning. Each cleanout shall be installed so that it 
opens to allow cleaning in the direction of flow of the soil or 
waste or at right angles thereto and, except in the case of wye 
branch and end-of-line cleanouts, shall be installed vertically 
above the flow line of the pipe. 


719.5 Access. Cleanouts installed under concrete or asphalt 
paving shall be made accessible by yard boxes or by extend- 
ing flush with paving with approved materials and shall be 
adequately protected. 


719.6 Manholes. Approved manholes shall be permitted to 
be installed in lieu of cleanouts, where first approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. The maximum distance 
between manholes shall not exceed 300 feet (91 440 mm). 


The inlet and outlet connections shall be made by the use 
of a flexible compression joint not less than 12 inches (305 
mm) and not exceeding 3 feet (914 mm) from the manhole. 
No flexible compression joints shall be embedded in the man- 
hole base. 


720.0 Sewer and Water Pipes. 


720.1 General. Building sewers or drainage piping of clay 
or materials that are not approved for use within a building 
shall not be run or laid in the same trench as the water pipes 
unless the following requirements are met: 


(1) The bottom of the water pipe, at points, shall be not less 
than 12 inches (305 mm) above the top of the sewer or 
drain line. 


(2) The water pipe shall be placed on a solid shelf excavated 
at one side of the common trench with a clear horizontal 
distance of not less than 12 inches (305 mm) from the 
sewer or drain line. 

(3) Water pipes crossing sewer or drainage piping con- 
structed of clay or materials that are not approved for use 
within a building shall be laid not less than 12 inches 
(305 mm) above the sewer or drainpipe. 


For the purpose of this section, “within a building" shall 
mean within the fixed limits of the building foundation. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


721.0 Location. 


721.1 Building Sewer. Except as provided in Section 721.2, 
no building sewer shall be located in a lot other than the lot that 
is the site of the building or structure served by such sewer nor 
shall a building sewer be located at a point having less than the 
minimum distances referenced in Table 721.1. 


TABLE 721.1 
MINIMUM HORIZONTAL DISTANCE REQUIRED 
FROM BUILDING SEWER (feet) 


Buildings or structures! 2 
Property line adjoining private property Clear? 
Water supply wells 50° 
Streams 50 
On-site domestic water service line 14 
Public water main 105 6 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm 

Notes: 


: Including porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered; breezeways; 


roofed porte-cochere; roofed patios; carports; covered walks; covered 
driveways; and similar structures or appurtenances. 

See also Section 312.3. 

Drainage piping shall clear domestic water supply wells by not less than 
50 feet (15 240 mm). This distance shall be permitted to be reduced to not 
less than 25 feet (7620 mm) where the drainage piping is constructed of 
materials approved for use within a building. 

See Section 720.0. 

For parallel construction. 

For crossings, approval by the Health Department or the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction shall be required. 


N 


თით ь 


721.2 Abutting Lot. Nothing contained in this code shall be 
construed to prohibit the use of all or part of an abutting lot to: 


(1) Provide access to connect a building sewer to an avail- 
able public sewer where proper cause and legal ease- 
ment, not in violation of other requirements, has been 
first established to the satisfaction of the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

(2) Provide additional space for a building sewer where the 
proper cause, transfer of ownership, or change of bound- 
ary, not in violation of other requirements, has been first 
established to the satisfaction of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. The instrument recording such action shall 
constitute an agreement with the Authority Having Juris- 
diction and shall clearly state and show that the areas so 
joined or used shall be maintained as a unit during the 
time they are so used. Such an agreement shall be 
recorded in the office of the County Recorder as part of 
the conditions of ownership of said properties, and shall 
be binding on heirs, successors, and assigns to such prop- 
erties. A copy of the instrument recording such proceed- 
ings shall be filed with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


722.0 Abandoned Sewers and Sewage Disposal 
Facilities. 


722.1 Building (House) Sewer. An abandoned building 
(house) sewer, or part thereof, shall be plugged or capped in an 
approved manner within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the property line. 


177 


SANITARY DRAINAGE 


722.2 Cesspools, Septic Tanks, and Seepage Pits. A 
cesspool, septic tank, and seepage pit that has been abandoned 
or has been discontinued otherwise from further use, or to 
which no waste or soil pipe from a plumbing fixture is con- 
nected, shall have the sewage removed therefrom and be com- 
pletely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete, or other 
approved material. 


722.3 Filling. The top cover or arch over the cesspool, sep- 
tic tank, or seepage pit shall be removed before filling, and the 
filling shall not extend above the top of the vertical portions 
of the sidewalls or above the level of the outlet pipe until 
inspection has been called and the cesspool, septic tank, or 
seepage pit has been inspected. After such inspection, the 
cesspool, septic tank, or seepage pit shall be filled to the level 
of the top of the ground. 


722.4 Ownership. No person owning or controlling a 
cesspool, septic tank, or seepage pit on the premises of such 
person or in that portion of a public street, alley, or other pub- 
lic property abutting such premises, shall fail, refuse, or neg- 
lect to comply with the provisions of this section or upon 
receipt of notice so to comply from the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


722.5 Disposal Facilities. Where disposal facilities are 
abandoned consequent to connecting premises with the pub- 
lic sewer, the permittee making the connection shall fill aban- 
doned facilities in accordance with the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction within 30 days from the time of connecting to the 
public sewer. 


723.0 Building Sewer Test. 


723.1 General. Building sewers shall be tested by plugging 
the end of the building sewer at its points of connection to the 
public sewer or private sewage disposal system and com- 
pletely filling the building sewer with water from the lowest 
to the highest point thereof, or by approved equivalent low- 
pressure air test. Plastic DWV piping systems shall not be 
tested by the air test method. The building sewer shall be 
watertight. 


724.0 Meat and Poultry Processing Plant Drainage. 
[AGR] 


724.1 The drainage and plumbing systems must permit the 
quick runoff of all water from plant buildings, and of surface 
water around the plant buildings, and of surface water around 
the plant and on the premises; and all such water shall be dis- 
posed of in such a manner as to prevent a nuisance or health 
hazard. 


724.2 Toilet soil lines shall be separated from house drainage 
lines to a point outside the building unless an automatic back- 
water check valve is installed to prevent backflow. Drainage 
from toilet bowls and urinals shall not be discharged into a 
grease catch basin, nor shall such drainage be permitted to 
enter the sewer lines at a point where there might be a possi- 
bility of such drainage backing up and flooding the floor of 
the building. 


178 


725.0 Collection Center and Facilities Drainage. 
[AGR] Drainage and plumbing systems shall meet the 
requirements of Section 724.1. 


726.0 Drainage and Plumbing, General. [AGR] 


726.1 The outer premises of every official establishment, 
including docks, areas where cars and other vehicles are 
loaded, driveways, approaches, yards, pens and alleys, shall 
be drained. 


726.2 Toilet soil lines shall be separated from house drainage 
lines to a point outside the building, and drainage from toilet 
bowls and urinals shall not be discharged into a grease catch 
basin. 


7270 Emergency Sanitary Drainage. [OSHPD 1] 


727.1 For new acute care hospital buildings submitted after the 
effective date of this code, the hospital shall have an on-site 
holding tank[s] to store sewage and liquid waste sufficient to 
operate essential hospital utilities and equipment in the acute 
care hospital building, to support 72 hours of continuing oper- 
ation in the event of an emergency. Any general acute care hos- 
pital in operation after January 1, 2030 shall have an on-site 
holding tank[s] to store sewage and liquid waste sufficient to 
operate essential hospital utilities and equipment in the acute 
care hospital buildings on the campus with an SPC-3, SPC-4, 
SPC-4D, or SPC-5 rating, to support 72 hours of continuing || 
operation in the event of an emergency. The emergency waste 
holding capacity shall be based on the Water 
Conservation/Water Rationing Plan required in Section 616.1. || 
See also California Building Code, Part 2, Section 1617A.1.40. 


Exception: Hook-ups that allow for the use of transportable 
means of sewage and liquid waste disposal may be provided 
instead of on-site storage if the hospital has a plan for stor- 
age of sewage and liquid waste. This plan may include the 
use of leak-proof bags if adequate storage of these and other 
bags of waste are provided. These storage facilities shall com- 
ply with the appropriate local health and environmental 
authorities’ requirements, California Department of Public 
Health requirements for medical waste management, and 
comply with the following minimum requirements: 


(a) Location[s]. Location[s] shall be provided for waste col- 
lection and storage with sufficient space based upon the 
volume of projected waste and length of anticipated stor- 
age. 

(b) Enclosure[s]. Lockable room[s] or lockable screened 
enclosure[s] of adequate capacity to store the quantity 
of waste anticipated shall be provided for the washing 
and cleaning of containers and for the storage of sewage 
and waste water. 

The room[s] or screened enclosure[s] shall include 
the following: 
I. Floor and curb. A sealed concrete floor or other 
approved impervious flooring with a curb and with 
a drain connected to the sewer. 


2. Water. Steam or hot water and cold water supplies in 
accordance with the California Plumbing Code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 8 - INDIRECT WASTES 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS 55/CC 1 1В 2 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X XX X XX XX XI XI XX XIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 179 


180 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 8 
INDIRECT WASTES 


801.0 General. 


801.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materials, 
design, and installation of indirect waste piping, receptors, 
and connections; and provisions for discharge and disposal 
of condensate wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, and 
clear water wastes. 


801.2 Air Gap or Air Break Required. Indirect waste pip- 
ing shall discharge into the building drainage system through 
an air gap or air break as set forth in this code. Where a 
drainage air gap is required by this code, the minimum verti- 
cal distance as measured from the lowest point of the indirect 
waste pipe or the fixture outlet to the flood-level rim of the 
receptor shall be not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm). 


801.3 Food and Beverage Handling Establishments. 
Establishments engaged in the storage, preparation, selling, 
serving, processing, or other handling of food and beverage 
involving the following equipment that requires drainage 
shall provide indirect waste piping for refrigerators, refriger- 
ation coils, freezers, walk-in coolers, iceboxes, ice-making 
machines, steam tables, egg boilers, coffee urns and brewers, 
hot-and-cold drink dispensers, and similar equipment. 


801.3.1 Size of Indirect Waste Pipes. Except for 
refrigeration coils and ice-making machines, the size of 
the indirect waste pipe shall be not smaller than the drain 
on the unit, but shall be not smaller than 1 inch (25 mm), 
and the maximum developed length shall not exceed 15 
feet (4572 mm). Indirect waste pipe for ice-making 
machines shall be not less than the drain on the unit and 
in no case less than % of an inch (20 mm). 


801.3.2 Walk-In Coolers. For walk-in coolers, floor 
drains shall be permitted to be connected to a separate 
drainage line discharging into an outside receptor. The 
flood-level rim of the receptor shall be not less than 6 
inches (152 mm) lower than the lowest floor drain. Such 
floor drains shall be trapped and individually vented. 
Cleanouts shall be provided at 90 degree (1.57 rad) turns 
and shall be accessibly located. Such waste shall dis- 
charge through an air gap or air break into a trapped and 
vented receptor, except that a full-size air gap is required 
where the indirect waste pipe is under vacuum. 


801.3.3 Food-Handling Fixtures. Food-preparation 
sinks, steam kettles, potato peelers, ice cream dipper 
wells, and similar equipment shall be indirectly connected 
to the drainage system by means of an air gap. Bins, sinks, 
and other equipment having drainage connections and 
used for the storage of unpackaged 1ce used for human 
ingestion, or used in direct contact with ready-to-eat food, 
shall be indirectly connected to the drainage system by 
means of an air gap. Each indirect waste pipe from food- 
handling fixtures or equipment shall be separately piped 
to the indirect waste receptor and shall not combine with 
other indirect waste pipes. The piping from the equipment 
to the receptor shall be not less than the drain on the unit 
and in no case less than % of an inch (15 mm). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


801.4 Bar and Fountain Sink Traps. Where the sink in a 
bar, soda fountain, or counter 1s so located that the trap serv- 
ing the sink cannot be vented, the sink drain shall discharge 
through an air gap or air break (see Section 801.3.3) into an 
approved receptor that is vented. The developed length from 
the fixture outlet to the receptor shall not exceed 5 feet (1524 
mm). 

801.5 Connections from Water Distribution System. 
Indirect waste connections shall be provided for drains, over- 
flows, or relief pipes from potable water pressure tanks, water 
heaters, boilers, and similar equipment that is connected to 
the potable water distribution system. Such indirect waste 
connections shall be made using a water-distribution air gap 
constructed in accordance with Table 603.3.1. 


801.6 Sterilizers. Lines, devices, or apparatus such as stills, 
sterilizers, and similar equipment requiring waste connections 
and used for sterile materials shall be indirectly connected 
using an air gap. Each such indirect waste pipe shall be sep- 
arately piped to the receptor and shall not exceed 15 feet 
(4572 mm). Such receptors shall be located in the same room. 


801.7 Drip or Drainage Outlets. Appliances, devices, or 
apparatus not regularly classified as plumbing fixtures, but 
which have a drip or drainage outlets, shall be permitted to be 
drained by indirect waste pipes discharging into an open 
receptor through either an air gap or air break (see Section 
801.3.1). 


802.0 Approvals. 


802.1 General. No plumbing fixtures served by indirect 
waste pipes or receiving discharge therefrom shall be installed 
until first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


803.0 Indirect Waste Piping. 


803.1 Materials. Pipe, tube, and fittings conveying indirect 
waste shall be of such materials and design as to perform their 
intended function to the satisfaction of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


803.2 Copper and Copper Alloys. Joints and connec- 
tions in copper and copper alloy pipe and tube shall be 
installed in accordance with Section 705.3. 


803.3 Pipe Size and Length. Except as hereinafter pro- 
vided, the size of indirect waste piping shall be in accordance 
with other sections of this code applicable to drainage and 
vent piping. No vent from indirect waste piping shall com- 
bine with a sewer-connected vent. Vents from indirect waste 
piping shall extend separately to the outside air. Indirect waste 
pipes exceeding 5 feet (1524 mm), but less than 15 feet (4572 
mm) in length shall be directly trapped, but such traps need 
not be vented. 


Indirect waste pipes less than 15 feet (4572 mm) in 
length shall be not less than the diameter of the drain outlet or 


181 


INDIRECT WASTES 


tailpiece ofthe fixture, appliance, or equipment served, and in 
no case less than % of an inch (15 mm). Angles and changes 
of direction in such indirect waste pipes shall be provided 
with cleanouts to permit flushing and cleaning. 


804.0 Indirect Waste Receptors. 


804.1 Standpipe Receptors. Plumbing fixtures or other 
receptors receiving the discharge of indirect waste pipes shall 
be approved for the use proposed and shall be of such shape 
and capacity as to prevent splashing or flooding and shall be 
located where they are readily accessible for inspection and 
cleaning. No standpipe receptor for a clothes washer shall 
extend more than 30 inches (762 mm), or not less than 18 
inches (457 mm) above its trap weir. No trap for a clothes 
washer standpipe receptor shall be installed below the floor, 
but shall be roughed in not less than 6 inches (152 mm) and 
not more than 18 inches (457 mm) above the floor. No indi- 
rect waste receptor shall be installed in a toilet room, closet, 
cupboard, or storeroom, or in a portion of a building not in 
general use by the occupants thereof; except standpipes for 
clothes washers shall be permitted to be installed in toilet and 
bathroom areas where the clothes washer is installed in the 
same room. 


805.0 Pressure Drainage Connections. 


805.1 General. Indirect waste connections shall be provided 
for drains, overflows, or relief vents from the water supply 
system, and no piping or equipment carrying wastes or pro- 
ducing wastes or other discharges under pressure shall be 
directly connected to a part of the drainage system. 


The preceding shall not apply to an approved sump pump 
or to an approved pressure-wasting plumbing fixture or 
device where the Authority Having Jurisdiction has been sat- 
isfied that the drainage system is adequately sized to accom- 
modate the anticipated discharge thereof. 


806.0 Sterile Equipment. 


806.1 General. Appliances, devices, or apparatus such as 
stills, sterilizers, and similar equipment requiring water and 
waste and used for sterile materials shall be drained through 
an air gap. 


807.0 Appliances. 


807.1 Non-Classed Apparatus. Commercial dishwashing 
machines, silverware washing machines, and other appli- 
ances, devices, equipment, or other apparatus not regularly 
classed as plumbing fixtures, which are equipped with pumps, 
drips, or drainage outlets, shall be permitted to be drained by 

| indirect waste pipes discharging through an air break into an 
approved type of open receptor. 


807.2 Undiluted Condensate Waste. Where undiluted 
condensate waste from a fuel-burning condensing appliance 
is discharged into the drainage system, the material in the 
drainage system shall be cast-iron, galvanized iron, plastic, 
or other materials approved for this use. 


182 


Exceptions: 


(1) Where the above condensate is discharged to an exposed 
fixture tailpiece and trap, such tailpiece and trap shall be 
permitted to be a copper alloy. 


(2) Materials approved in Section 701.0 shall be permitted to 
be used where data is provided that the condensate waste 
is adequately diluted. 


807.3 Domestic Dishwashing Machine. No domestic 
dishwashing machine shall be directly connected to a 
drainage system or food waste disposer without the use of an 
approved dishwasher air gap fitting on the discharge side of 
the dishwashing machine. Listed dishwasher air gap fittings | 
shall be installed with the flood-level (FL) marking at or 
above the flood level of the sink or drainboard, whichever is 
higher. 


808.0 Cooling Water. 


808.1 General. Where permitted by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, clean running water used exclusively as a cool- 
ing medium in an appliance, device, or apparatus shall be per- 
mitted to discharge into the drainage system through the inlet 
side of a fixture trap in the event that a suitable fixture is not 
available to receive such discharge. Such trap connection 
shall be by means of a pipe connected to the inlet side of an 
approved fixture trap, the upper end terminating in a funnel- 
shaped receptacle set adjacent, and not less than 6 inches (152 
mm) above the overflow rim of the fixture. 


809.0 Drinking Fountains. 


809.1 General. Drinking fountains shall be permitted to be 
installed with indirect wastes through an air break. I 


810.0 Steam and Hot Water Drainage Condensers 
and Sumps. 


810.1 High-Temperature Discharge. No steam pipe shall 
be directly connected to plumbing or drainage system, nor 
shall water having a temperature above 140?F (60?C) be dis- 
charged under pressure directly into a drainage system. Pipes 
from boilers shall discharge by means of indirect waste pip- 
ing as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction or the 
boiler manufacturer's recommendations. Such pipes shall be 
permitted to be indirectly connected by discharging into an 
open or closed condenser or an intercepting sump of an 
approved type that will prevent the entrance of steam or such 
water under pressure into the drainage system. Closed con- 
densers or sumps shall be provided with a vent that shall be 
taken off the top and extended separately, full size above the 
roof. Condensers and sumps shall be properly trapped at the 
outlet with a deep seal trap extending to within 6 inches (152 
mm) of the bottom of the tank. The top of the deep seal trap 
shall have a % of an inch (19.1 mm) opening located at the 
highest point of the trap to serve as a siphon breaker. Outlets 
shall be taken off from the side in such a manner as to allow 
a waterline to be maintained that will permanently occupy not 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


less than one-half the capacity of the condenser or sump. 
Inlets shall enter above the waterline. Wearing plates or baf- 
fles shall be installed in the tank to protect the shell. The sizes 
of the blowoff line inlet, the water outlets, and the vent shall 
be as shown in Table 810.1. The contents of condensers 
receiving steam or hot water under pressure shall pass through 
an open sump before entering the drainage system. 


TABLE 810.1 
PIPE CONNECTIONS IN BLOWOFF 
CONDENSERS AND SUMPS 
(inches) 
BOILER BLOWOFF WATER OUTLET VENT 

24% 24% 2 

1 1 2% 
1A 1⁄4 3 
1^ 1% 4 

2 2 5 
2^ 2% 6 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
* To be used only with boilers of 100 square feet (9.29 m?) of heating sur- 
face or less. 


810.2 Sumps, Condensers, and Intercepting Tanks. 
Sumps, condensers, or intercepting tanks that are constructed 
of concrete shall have walls and bottom, not less than 4 inches 
(102 mm) in thickness, and the inside shall be cement plas- 
tered not less than % of an inch (12.7 mm) in thickness. Con- 
densers constructed of metal shall be not less than No. 12 U.S. 
standard gauge (0.109 inch) (2.77 mm), and such metal con- 
densers shall be protected from external corrosion by an 
approved bituminous coating. 


810.3 Cleaning. Sumps and condensers shall be provided 
with suitable means of access for cleaning and shall contain 
a volume of not less than twice the volume of water removed 
from the boiler or boilers connected to it where the normal 
water level of such boiler or boilers is reduced not less than 
4 inches (102 mm). 


810.4 Strainers. An indirect waste interceptor is receiving 
discharge-containing particles that would clog the receptor 
drain shall have a readily removable beehive strainer. 


811.0 Chemical Wastes. 


811.1 Pretreatment. Chemical or liquid industrial wastes 
that are likely to damage or increase maintenance costs on the 
sanitary sewer system, detrimentally affect sewage treatment 
or contaminate surface or subsurface waters shall be pre- 
treated to render them innocuous before discharge into a 
drainage system. Detailed construction documents of the pre- 
treatment facilities shall be required by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


Piping conveying industrial, chemical, or process wastes 
from their point of origin to sewer-connected pretreatment 
facilities shall be of such material and design as to adequately 
perform its intended function to the satisfaction ofthe Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. Drainage discharge piping from pre- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDIRECT WASTES 


treatment facilities or interceptors shall be in accordance with 
standard drainage installation procedures. 


Copper or copper alloy tube shall not be used for chem- 
ical or industrial wastes as defined in this section. 


811.2 Waste and Vent Pipes. Each waste pipe receiving or 
intended to receive the discharge of a fixture into which acid 
or corrosive chemical is placed, and each vent pipe connected 
thereto, shall be constructed of chlorinated polyvinyl chlo- 
ride (CPVC), polypropylene (PP), polyvinylidene fluoride 
(PVDF), chemical-resistant glass, high-silicon iron pipe, or 
lead pipe with a wall thickness of not less than of an inch 
(3.2 mm); an approved type of ceramic glazed or unglazed 
vitrified clay; or other approved corrosion-resistant materi- 
als. CPVC pipe and fittings shall comply with ASTM Е2618. 
PP pipe and fittings shall comply with ASTM F1412 or CSA 
B181.3. PVDF pipe and fittings shall comply with ASTM 
F1673 or CSA B181.3. Chemical-resistant glass pipe and fit- 
tings shall comply with ASTM C1053. High-silicon iron pipe 
and fittings shall comply with ASTM A861. 

811.3 Joining Materials. Joining materials shall be of 
approved type and quality. 

811.4 Access. Where practicable, the piping shall be read- 
ily accessible and installed with the maximum of clearance 
from other services. 

811.5 Permanent Record. The owner shall make and keep 
a permanent record of the location of piping and venting car- 
rying chemical waste. 

811.6 Chemical Vent. No chemical vent shall intersect 
vents for other services. 

811.7 Discharge. Chemical wastes shall be discharged in a 
manner approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
811.8 Diluted Chemicals. The provisions of this section 
about materials and methods of construction shall not apply 
to installations such as photographic or x-ray darkrooms or 
research or control laboratories where minor amounts of ade- 
quately diluted chemicals are discharged. 


812.0 Clear Water Wastes. 

812.1 General. Water lifts, expansion tanks, cooling jack- 
ets, sprinkler systems, drip or overflow pans, or similar 
devices that discharge clear wastewater into the building 
drainage system shall discharge through an indirect waste. 


813.0 Swimming Pools. 


813.1 General. Pipes carrying wastewater from swimming 
or wading pools, including pool drainage and backwash from 
filters, shall be installed as an indirect waste. Where a pump 
is used to discharge pool waste water to the drainage system, 
the pump discharge shall be installed as an indirect waste. 


814.0 Condensate Waste and Control. 


814.1 Condensate Disposal. Condensate from air wash- 
ers, air-cooling coils, condensing appliances, and the over- 


183 


INDIRECT WASTES 


flow from evaporative coolers and similar water-supplied 
equipment or similar air-conditioning equipment shall be col- 
lected and discharged to an approved plumbing fixture or dis- 
posal area. Where discharged into the drainage system, 
equipment shall drain using an indirect waste pipe. The waste 
pipe shall have a slope of not less than 4 inch per foot (10.4 
mm/m) or 1 percent slope and shall be of an approved corro- 
sion-resistant material not smaller than the outlet size in 
accordance with Section 814.3 or Section 814.4 for air-cool- 
ing coils or condensing appliances, respectively. Condensate 
or wastewater shall not drain over a public way. 


814.11 Condensate Pumps. Where approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, condensate pumps shall 
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instal- 
lation instructions. Pump discharge shall rise vertically to 
a point where it is possible to connect to a gravity con- 
densate drain and discharged to an approved disposal 
point. Each condensing unit shall be provided with a sep- 
arate sump and interlocked with the equipment to pre- 
vent the equipment from operating during a failure. 
Separate pumps shall be permitted to connect to a single 
gravity indirect waste where equipped with check valves 
and approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


814.2 Condensate Control. Where any equipment or 
appliance is installed in a space where damage is capable of 
resulting from condensate overflow, a drain line shall be pro- 
vided and shall be drained in accordance with Section 814.1. 
An additional protection method for condensate overflow 
shall be provided in accordance with one of the following: 


(1) A water level detecting device that will shut off the 
equipment or appliance in the event the primary drain is 
blocked. Such detecting device shall be in accordance 
with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


(2) An additional watertight pan of corrosion-resistant mate- 
rial, with a separate drain line, installed beneath the cool- 
ing coil, unit, or the appliance to catch the overflow 
condensate due to a clogged primary condensate drain. 


| (3) An additional separate drain line at a level that is higher 
than the primary drain line connection of the drain pan. 


(4) An additional watertight pan of corrosion-resistant mate- 
rial with a water level detection device installed beneath 
the cooling coil, unit, or the appliance to catch the over- 
flow condensate due to a clogged primary condensate 
drain and to shut off the equipment. 


The additional pan or the additional drain line connec- 
tion shall be provided with a drainpipe of not less than 74 of 
an inch (20 mm) nominal pipe size, discharging at a point that 
Is readily observed. 

814.2.1 Protection of Appurtenances. Where insu- 
lation or appurtenances are installed where damage is 
capable of resulting from a condensate drain pan overfill, 
such installations shall occur above the rim of the drain 
pan with supports. Where the supports are in contact with 
the condensate waste, the supports shall be of approved 
corrosion-resistant material. 


184 


814.3 Condensate Waste Pipe Material and Sizing. 
Condensate waste pipes from air-cooling coils shall be sized 
in accordance with the equipment capacity as specified in 
Table 814.3. The material of the piping shall comply with the 
pressure and temperature rating of the appliance or equipment 
and shall be approved for use with the liquid being dis- 
charged. 


TABLE 814.3 
MINIMUM CONDENSATE PIPE SIZE 


EQUIPMENT CAPACITY IN TONS MESE E PIRE 
OF REFRIGERATION Ч 
(inches) 
Up to 20 34 
21—40 1 
41 — 90 1% 
91 — 125 1^ 
126 – 250 2 


For SI units: 1 ton of refrigerant = 3.52 kW, 1 inch = 25 mm 


The size of condensate waste pipes is for one unit or a 
combination of units, or as recommended by the manufac- 
turer. The capacity of waste pipes assumes a % inch per foot 
(10.4 mm/m) or 1 percent slope, with the pipe running three- 
quarters full at the following pipe conditions: 


Outside Air — 2096 Room Air — 8096 

DB WB DB WB 

90?F 73°F 75°F 62.5°F 
For SI units: °C = (?F-32)/1.8 


Condensate drain sizing for other slopes or other condi- 
tions shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

Air-conditioning waste pipes, 1% of an inch (32 mm) and 
larger in size, shall be constructed of materials specified in 
Chapter 7. Condensate waste piping less than 1% of an inch 
(32 mm) in size shall be permitted to be PVC, CPVC, PE, PP, 
copper, or other rigid materials approved by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


814.3.1 Cleanouts. Condensate drain lines shall be 
configured or provided with a cleanout to permit the 
clearing of blockages and for maintenance without 
requiring the drain line to be cut. 


814.4 Appliance Condensate Drains. Condensate drain 
lines from individual condensing appliances shall be sized as 
required by the manufacturer’s instructions. Condensate drain 
lines serving more than one appliance connecting to a com- 
mon indirect waste pipe shall have the connections to the indi- 
rect waste pipe protected by a sanitary waste valve complying 
with ASME A112.18.8, condensate trap complying with 
IAPMO ICC 196, or trap with a trap primer. 


814.5 Point of Discharge. Air-conditioning condensate 
waste pipes shall connect indirectly to the drainage system | 
through an air gap or air break to trapped and vented recep- 
tors, dry wells, mop sinks, leach pits, or the tailpiece of 
plumbing fixtures. An individual condensate drain shall be 
trapped in accordance with the appliance manufacturer's 
instructions or in accordance with Section 814.4. | 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


814.6 Condensate Waste from Air-Conditioning 
Coils. Where the condensate waste from air-conditioning 
coils discharges by direct connection to a lavatory tailpiece or 
to an approved accessible inlet on a bathtub overflow, the 
connection shall be located in the area controlled by the same 
person controlling the air-conditioned space. 

814.7 Plastic Fittings. Female plastic screwed fittings shall 
be used with male plastic fittings and plastic threads. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDIRECT WASTES 


185 


186 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 9 - VENTS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 


Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 1AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX XIX XXIX X 


sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
903.1(2) X 
903.1.1 XX 


903.1.2 X 
903.1.3 X XXX X 


906.2.1 XX XX XI XXX 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 187 


188 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 9 
VENTS 


901.0 General. 


901.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materials, 
design, and installation of plumbing vent systems. 


901.2 Vents Required. Each plumbing fixture trap, except 
as otherwise provided in this code, shall be protected against 
siphonage and backpressure, and air circulation shall be 
ensured throughout all parts of the drainage system by means 
of vent pipes installed in accordance with the requirements 
of this chapter and as otherwise required by this code. 


901.3 Trap Seal Protection. The vent system shall be 
designed to prevent a trap seal from being exposed to a pres- 
sure differential that exceeds 1 inch water column (0.24 kPa) 
on the outlet side of the trap. 


902.0 Vents Not Required. 


902.1 Interceptor. Vent piping shall be permitted to be 
omitted on an interceptor where such interceptor acts as a pri- 
mary settling tank and discharges through a horizontal indi- 
rect waste pipe into a secondary interceptor. The second 
interceptor shall be properly trapped and vented. 


902.2 Bars, Soda Fountains, and Counter. Traps serv- 
ing sinks that are part of the equipment of bars, soda foun- 
tains, and counters need not be vented where the location and 
construction of such bars, soda fountains, and counters are 
such as to make it impossible to do so. Where such condi- 
tions exist, said sinks shall discharge using approved indirect 
waste pipes into a floor sink or other approved type of recep- 
tor. 


903.0 Materials. 


903.1 Applicable Standards. Vent pipe and fittings shall 
comply with the applicable standards referenced in Table 
701.2, except that: 


(1) No galvanized steel or 304 stainless steel pipe shall be 
installed underground and shall be not less than 6 inches 
(152 mm) aboveground. 


(2) ABS and PVC DWV piping installations shall be in 
accordance with the firestop protection requirements in 
the California Building Code. Except for individual sin- 
gle-family dwelling units, materials exposed within ducts 
or plenums shall have a flame-spread index of not more 
than 25 and a smoke-developed index of not more than 
50 where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 or UL 
723. Plastic piping installed in plenums shall be tested in 
accordance with all requirements of ASTM E84 or UL 
723. Mounting methods, supports and sample sizes of 
materials for testing that are not specified in ASTM E84 
or UL 723 shall be prohibited. 


903.1.1 [HCD 1 & HCD 2] ABS or PVC installations 
are limited to not more than two stories of areas of resi- 
dential accommodation. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


903.1.2 [HCD 1] All malleable iron vents shall be gal- 


vanized. 


903.1.3 [OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] ABS and PVC instal- 
lations are not allowed. 


903.2 Use of Copper or Copper Alloy Tubing. Copper 
or copper alloy tube for underground drainage and vent pip- 
ing shall have a weight of not less than that of copper or cop- 
per alloy drainage tube type DWV. 


903.2.1 Aboveground. Copper or copper alloy tube 
for aboveground drainage and vent piping shall have a 
weight of not less than that of copper or copper alloy 
drainage tube type DWV. 


903.2.2 Prohibited Use. Copper or copper alloy tube 
shall not be used for chemical or industrial wastes as 
defined in Section 811.0. 


903.2.3 Marking. Copper or copper alloy tubing, in 
addition to the required incised marking, shall be marked 
in accordance with either ASTM B306 or ASTM B88. 
The colors shall be Type K, green; Type L, blue; Type 
M, red; and Type DWV, yellow. 


903.3 Changes in Direction. Changes in the direction of 
vent piping shall be made by the appropriate use of approved 
fittings, and no such pipe shall be strained or bent. Burred 
ends shall be reamed to the full bore of the pipe. 


904.0 Size of Vents. 


904.1 Size. The size of vent piping shall be determined from 
its length and the total number of fixture units connected 
thereto, in accordance with Table 703.2. The diameter of an 
individual vent shall be not less than 1% inches (32 mm) пог 
less than one-half the diameter of the drain to which it is con- 
nected. In addition, the drainage piping of each building and 
each connection to a public sewer or a private sewage dis- 
posal system shall be vented by means of one or more vent 
pipes, the aggregate cross-sectional area of which shall be not 
less than that of the largest required building sewer as deter- 
mined from Table 703.2. Vent pipes from fixtures located 
upstream from pumps, ejectors, backwater valves, or other 
devices that obstruct the free flow of air and other gases 
between the building sewer and the outside atmosphere shall 
not be used for meeting the cross-sectional area venting 
requirements of this section. 


Exception: Where connected to a common building sewer, the 
drainage piping of two or more buildings located on the same 
lot and under one ownership shall be permitted to be vented by 
means of piping sized in accordance with Table 703.2, pro- 
vided the aggregate cross-sectional area of vents is not less than 
that of the largest required common building sewer. 

904.2 Length. Not more than one-third of the total permit- 
ted length, in accordance with Table 703.2, of a minimum- 
sized vent shall be installed in a horizontal position. Where a 
minimum-sized vent is increased one pipe size for its entire 
length, the maximum length limitation shall not apply. 


189 


VENTS 


905.0 Vent Pipe Grades and Connections. 


905.1 Grade. Vent and branch vent pipes shall be free from 
drops or sags, and each such vent shall be level or shall be so 
graded and connected as to drip back by gravity to the 
drainage pipe it serves. 


905.2 Horizontal Drainage Pipe. Where vents connect to 
a horizontal drainage pipe, each vent pipe shall have its invert 
taken off above the drainage centerline of such pipe down- 
stream of the trap being served. 


905.3 Vent Pipe Rise. Unless prohibited by structural con- 
ditions, each vent shall rise vertically to a point not less than 
6 inches (152 mm) above the flood-level rim of the fixture 
served before offsetting horizontally, and where two or more 
vent pipes converge, each such vent pipe shall rise to a point 
not less than 6 inches (152 mm) in height above the flood- 
level rim of the plumbing fixture it serves before being con- 
nected to any other vent. Vents less than 6 inches (152 mm) 
above the flood-level rim of the fixture shall be installed with 
approved drainage fittings, material, and grade to the drain. 


905.4 Roof Termination. Vent pipes shall extend undi- 
minished in size above the roof, or shall be reconnected with 
soil or waste vent of the proper size. 


905.5 Location of Opening. The vent pipe opening from 
soil or waste pipe shall not be below the weir of the trap. 


Exception: Water closets and similar fixtures. 


905.6 Common Vertical Pipe. Two fixtures shall be per- 
mitted to be served by a common vertical pipe where each 
such fixture wastes separately into an approved double fitting 
having inlet openings at the same level. 


906.0 Vent Termination. 


906.1 Roof Termination. Each vent pipe or stack shall 
extend through its flashing and shall terminate vertically not 
less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the roof nor less than 1 
foot (305 mm) from a vertical surface. ABS and PVC piping 
exposed to sunlight shall be protected by water based syn- 
thetic latex paints. 


906.2 Clearance. Each vent shall terminate not less than 
10 feet (3048 mm) from, or not less than 3 feet (914 mm) 
above, an openable window, door, opening, air intake, or vent 
shaft, or not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in every direction from 
a lot line, alley and street excepted. 


906.2.1 [OSHPD 1,1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Each vent pipe 
shall terminate not less than twenty-five (25) feet (7620 
mm) from any air intake or vent shaft. 


906.3 Use of Roof. Vent pipes shall be extended separately 
or combined, of full required size, not less than 6 inches (152 
mm) above the roof or firewall. Flagpoling of vents shall be 
prohibited except where the roof is used for assembly pur- 
poses or parking. Vents within 10 feet (3048 mm) ofa part of 
the roof that is used for assembly purposes or parking shall 
extend not less than 7 feet (2134 mm) above such roof and 
shall securely stay. 


906.4 Outdoor Installations. Vent pipes for outdoor 
installations shall extend not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) 
above the surrounding ground and shall be securely sup- 
ported. 


190 


906.5 Joints. Joints at the roof around vent pipes shall be 
made watertight by the use of approved flashings or flashing 
material. 


906.6 Lead. (See Chapter 17) Sheet lead shall comply with 
the following: 


(1) For safe pans — not less than 4 pounds per square foot 
(lb/ft?) (19 kg/m?) or Мв of an inch (1.6 mm) thick. 


(2) For flashings or vent terminals — not less than 3 Ib/ft? (15 
kg/m?) or 0.0472 of an inch (1.2 mm) thick. 


(3) Lead bends and lead traps shall be not less than % of an 
inch (3.2 mm) in wall thickness. 


906.7 Frost or Snow Closure. Where frost or snow clo- 
sure 1s likely to occur in locations having minimum design 
temperature below 0°F (-17.8?C), vent terminals shall be not 
less than 3 inches (76 mm) in diameter, but in no event] 
smaller than the required vent pipe. The change in diameter 
shall be made inside the building not less than 1 foot (305 
mm) below the roof in an insulated space and terminate not 
less than 10 inches (254 mm) above the roof, or in accordance 
with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


907.0 Vent Stacks and Relief Vents. 


907.1 Drainage Stack. Each drainage stack that extends 10 
or more stories shall be served by a parallel vent stack, which 
shall extend undiminished in size from its upper terminal and 
connect to the drainage stack at or immediately below the 
lowest fixture drain. Each such vent stack shall also be con- 
nected to the drainage stack at each fifth floor, counting down 
from the uppermost fixture drain, using a yoke vent, the size 
of which shall be not less in diameter than either the drainage 
or the vent stack, whichever is smaller. 


907.2 Yoke Vent. The yoke vent connection to the vent stack 
shall be placed not less than 42 inches (1067 mm) above the 
floor level, and the yoke vent connection to the drainage stack 
shall be using a wye-branch fitting placed below the lowest 
drainage branch connection serving that floor. 


908.0 Wet Venting. 


908.1 Vertical Wet Venting. Wet venting is limited to ver- 
tical drainage piping receiving the discharge from the trap 
arm of one and two fixture unit fixtures that also serves as a 
vent not exceeding four fixtures. Wet-vented fixtures shall be 
within the same story; provided, further, that fixtures with a 
continuous vent discharging into a wet vent shall be within 
the same story as the wet-vented fixtures. No wet vent shall 
exceed 6 feet (1829 mm) in developed length. 


908.1.1 Size. The vertical piping between two consec- 
utive inlet levels shall be considered a wet-vented sec- 
tion. Each wet-vented section shall be not less than one 
pipe size exceeding the required minimum waste pipe 
size ofthe upper fixture or shall be one pipe size exceed- 
ing the required minimum pipe size for the sum of the 
fixture units served by such wet-vented section, 
whichever is larger, but in no case less than 2 inches (50 
mm) in diameter. 


908.1.2 Vent Connection. Common vent sizing shall 
be the sum of the fixture units served but, in no case, 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


smaller than the minimum vent pipe size required for a 
fixture served, or by Section 904.0. 


908.2 Horizontal Wet Venting for a Bathroom Group. 
A bathroom group located on the same floor level shall be 
permitted to be vented by a horizontal wet vent where all of 
the conditions of Section 908.2.1 through Section 908.2.5 are 
met. 


908.2.1 Vent Connection. The dry vent connection to 
the wet vent shall be an individual vent for the bidet, 
shower, or bathtub. One or two vented lavatory(s) shall 
be permitted to serve as a wet vent for a bathroom group. 
Only one wet-vented fixture drain or trap arm shall dis- 
charge upstream of the dry-vented fixture drain connec- 
tion. Dry vent connections to the horizontal wet vent 
shall be in accordance with Section 905.2 and Section 
905.3. 


908.2.2 Size. The wet vent shall be sized based on the 
fixture unit discharge into the wet vent. The wet vent 
shall be not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter for 4 
drainage fixture units (dfu) or less, and not less than 3 
inches (80 mm) in diameter for 5 dfu or more. The dry 
vent shall be sized in accordance with Table 702.1 and 
Table 703.2 based on the total fixture units discharging 
into the wet vent. 


908.2.3 Trap Arm. The length of the trap arm shall not 
exceed the limits in Table 1002.2. The trap size shall be 
in accordance with Section 1003.3. The vent pipe open- 
ing from the horizontal wet vent, except for water clos- 
ets and similar fixtures, shall not be below the weir of 
the trap. 


908.2.4 Water Closet. The water closet fixture drain or 
trap arm connection to the wet vent shall be downstream 
of fixture drain or trap arm connections to the horizontal 
wet vent. 


908.2.5 Additional Fixtures. Additional fixtures shall 
discharge downstream of the wet vent system and be 
conventionally vented. Only the fixtures within the bath- 
room group shall connect to the wet-vented horizontal 
branch. 


909.0 Special Venting for Island Fixtures. 


909.1 General. Traps for island sinks and similar equipment 
shall be roughed in above the floor and shall be permitted to 
be vented by extending the vent as high as possible, but not 
less than the drainboard height and then returning it down- 
ward and connecting it to the horizontal sink drain immedi- 
ately downstream from the vertical fixture drain. The return 
vent shall be connected to the horizontal drain through a wye- 
branch fitting and shall, in addition, be provided with a foot 
vent taken off the vertical fixture vent by means of a wye 
branch immediately below the floor and extending to the 
nearest partition and then through the roof to the open air, or 
shall be permitted to be connected to other vents at a point 
not less than 6 inches (152 mm) above the flood-level rim of 
the fixtures served. Drainage fittings shall be used on the vent 
below the floor level, and a slope of not less than 1⁄4 inch per 
foot (20.8 mm/m) back to the drain shall be maintained. The 
return bend used under the drainboard shall be a one-piece 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


VENTS 


fitting or an assembly of a 45 degree (0.79 rad), a 90 degree 
(1.57 rad), and a 45 degree (0.79 rad) elbow in the order 
named. Pipe sizing shall be as elsewhere required in this code. 
The island sink drain, upstream of the returned vent, shall 
serve no other fixtures. An accessible cleanout shall be 
installed in the vertical portion of the foot vent. 


910.0 Combination Waste and Vent Systems. 


910.1 Where Permitted. Combination waste and vent sys- 
tems shall be permitted where structural conditions preclude 
the installation of conventional systems as otherwise pre- 
scribed by this code. 


910.2 Approval. Construction documents for each combi- 
nation waste and vent system shall first be approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction before a portion of such system 
is installed. 


910.3 Vents. Each combination waste and vent system, as 
defined in Chapter 2, shall be provided with a vent or vents 
adequate to ensure free circulation of air. A branch exceeding 
15 feet (4572 mm) in length shall be separately vented in an 
approved manner. The area of a vent installed in a combina- 
tion waste and vent system shall be not less than one-half the 
inside cross-sectional area of the drainpipe served. The vent 
connection shall be downstream of the uppermost fixture. 


910.4 Connections and Size. Branches serving traps 
shall connect to the main line at an angle not exceeding 2 per- 
cent. Each waste pipe and each trap in such a system shall be 
not less than two pipe sizes exceeding the sizes required by 
Chapter 7 of this code, and not less than two pipe sizes 
exceeding a fixture tailpiece or connection. 


910.5 Vertical Waste Pipe. No vertical waste pipe shall be 
used in such a system, except the tailpiece or connection 
between the outlet of a plumbing fixture and the trap. Such 
tailpieces or connections shall be as short as possible, and in 
no case shall exceed 2 feet (610 mm). 


Exception: Branch lines shall be permitted to have 45 degree 
(0.79 rad) vertical offsets. 


910.6 Cleanouts. An accessible cleanout shall be installed 
in each vent for the combination waste and vent system. 
Cleanouts shall not be required on a wet-vented branch serv- 
ing a single trap where the fixture tailpiece or connection is 
not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in diameter and provides ready 
access for cleaning through the trap. 


910.7 Fixtures. No water closet or urinal shall be installed 
on such a system. Other one, two, or three unit fixtures 
remotely located from the sanitary system and adjacent to a 
combination waste and vent system shall be permitted to be 
connected to such system in the conventional manner by 
means of waste and vent pipes of regular sizes, providing that 
the two pipe size increase required in Section 910.4 is based 
on the total fixture unit load connected to the system. 


See Appendix B of this code for explanatory notes on the 
design of combination waste and vent systems. 


911.0 Circuit Venting. 


911.1 Circuit Vent Permitted. A maximum of eight floor- 
outlet water closets, showers, bathtubs, or floor drains con- 


191 


VENTS 


nected to a horizontal branch shall be permitted to be circuit 
vented. Each trap arm shall connect horizontally to the hori- 
zontal branch being circuit vented in accordance with Table 
1002.2. The horizontal branch shall be classified as a drain 
and a vent from the most downstream trap arm connection to 
the most upstream trap arm connection to the horizontal 
branch. 


Exception: Back-outlet and wall-hung water closets shall be 
permitted to be circuit vented provided that no floor-outlet 
fixtures are connected to the same horizontal branch. Back- 
outlet and wall-hung water closets shall connect horizontally 
to the horizontal circuit vented drain. 


911.2 Circuit Vent Size and Connection. The circuit 
vent size shall be in accordance with Table 703.2 according 
to the number of circuit vented fixtures connected to the hor- 
izontal branch but shall be not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in 
diameter. The vent shall connect to the horizontal branch on 
the vertical between the two most upstream trap arms. The 
circuit vent pipe shall not receive the discharge of soil or 
waste. 


911.2.1 Multiple Circuit Vents. When multiple circuit 
vents are interconnected according to Section 911.4.1, 
each individual circuit vent shall be sized according to 
Section 911.2. The vent pipe connecting each circuit vent 
shall be sized according to Table 703.2. 


911.3 Relief Vent. A 2 inch (50 mm) relief vent shall be pro- 
vided for circuit-vented horizontal branches receiving the dis- 
charge of four or more water closets when connecting to a 
drainage stack that receives the discharge of soil or waste 
from upper horizontal branches. 


911.3.1 Connection and Installation. The relief vent 
shall connect to the horizontal branch between the stack 
and the most downstream trap arm of the circuit vent. 
The relief vent shall be installed on the vertical to the 
horizontal branch. 


911.3.2 Fixture Drain. The relief vent is permitted to 
serve as a fixture drain. Fixtures discharging to a relief 
vent shall be one or two fixture unit fixtures but shall not 
exceed a total of 4 fixture units. 


911.4 Slope and Size of Horizontal Branch. The vented 
section of the horizontal branch shall be uniformly sloped and 
not more than 1 inch per foot (83.3 mm/m). The entire length 
of the vented section of the horizontal branch shall be sized 
for the total drainage discharge to the branch according to 
Table 703.2. 


911.4.1 Multiple Circuit-Vented Branches. Circuit- 
vented horizontal branches are permitted to be connected 
together. Each group of a maximum of eight fixtures 
shall be considered a separate circuit vent and shall be in 
accordance with Section 911.4.1.1 and Section 911.4.1.2. 


911.4.1.1 Size of Parallel Horizontal 
Branches. Parallel horizontal circuit vented 
branches shall be permitted to connect on the same 
floor level. Each separate circuit-vented horizontal 
branch that is interconnected shall be sized inde- 
pendently in accordance with Section 911.4. 


192 


911.4.1.2 Size of Continuous Horizontal 
Branches. Two or more circuit vented systems 
continuous on the same horizontal branch shall be 
uniformly sized for the total discharge into the 
branch. 


911.5 Additional Fixtures. Fixtures, other than the circuit- 
vented fixtures, are permitted to discharge to the horizontal 
branch drain. Such fixtures shall be located on the same floor 
as the circuit-vented fixtures and shall be either individually 
or common vented. 


912.0 Engineered Vent System. 

912.1 General. The design and sizing of a vent system shall 
be permitted to be determined by accepted engineering prac- 
tices. The system shall be designed by a registered design pro- 
fessional and approved in accordance with Section 301.5. 
912.2 Minimum Requirements. An engineered vent sys- 
tem shall provide protection of the trap seal in accordance 
with Section 901.3. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 10 - TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 1AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X X X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX XIX XXIX X X 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
1003.1 Exception 2 XIX 
|| 10702 
1010.3 
1010.4 


1010.5 
1014.14, B, C XXXXXX 


1015.5 XXX XXIX 
1015.6 XX XX XXIX 


“| ж ж 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: Y 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 193 


194 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 10 
TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


1001.0 General. 


1001.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materi- 
als, design, and installation of traps and interceptors. 


1001.2 Where Required. Each plumbing fixture shall be sep- 
arately trapped by an approved type of liquid seal trap. This 
section shall not apply to fixtures with integral traps. Not more 
than one trap shall be permitted on a trap arm. Food waste dis- 
posers installed with a set of restaurant, commercial, or indus- 
trial sinks shall be connected to a separate trap. 


| Each domestic clothes washer and each laundry sink shall 
be connected to a separate and independent trap, except that a 

| trap serving a laundry sink shall also be permitted to receive 
the waste from a clothes washer set adjacent to it. 


The vertical distance between a fixture outlet and the trap 
weir shall be as short as practicable, but in no case shall the 
tailpiece exceed 24 inches (610 mm) in length. 


One trap shall be permitted to serve a set of not more than 

| three single compartment sinks or laundry sinks of the same 

depth or three lavatories immediately adjacent to each other 

and in the same room where the waste outlets are not more than 

30 inches (762 mm) apart, and the trap 1s centrally located 
where three compartments are installed. 


1002.0 Traps Protected by Vent Pipes. 


1002.1 Vent Pipes. Each plumbing fixture trap, except as 
otherwise provided in this code, shall be protected against 
siphonage, backpressure, and air circulation shall be assured 
throughout the drainage system using a vent pipe installed in 
accordance with the requirements of this code. 


1002.2 Fixture Traps. Each fixture trap shall have a pro- 
tecting vent so located that the developed length of the trap 
arm from the trap weir to the inner edge of the vent shall be 
within the distance given in Table 1002.2 but in no case less 
than two times the diameter of the trap arm. 

1002.3 Change of Direction. A trap arm shall be permit- 
ted to change direction without the use of a cleanout where 
such change of direction does not exceed 90 degrees (1.57 
rad). Horizontal changes in the direction of trap arms shall be 
in accordance with Section 706.3. 

Exception: For trap arms, 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter and 
larger, the change of direction shall not exceed 135 degrees 
(2.36 rad) without the use of a cleanout. 

1002.4 Vent Pipe Opening. The vent pipe opening from 
soil or waste pipe, except for water closets and similar fix- 
tures, shall not be below the weir of the trap. 


1003.0 Traps — Described. 


1003.1 General Requirements. Each trap, except for 
traps within an interceptor or similar device shall be self- 
cleaning. Traps for bathtubs, showers, lavatories, sinks, laun- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


dry sinks, floor drains, urinals, drinking fountains, dental | 
units, and similar fixtures shall be of standard design, weight 
and shall be of ABS, cast-brass, cast-iron, lead, PP, PVC, or 
other approved material. An exposed and readily accessible 
drawn-copper alloy tubing trap, not less than 17 B & S Gauge 
(0.045 inch) (1.143 mm), shall be permitted to be used on fix- 
tures discharging domestic sewage. 


Exceptions: II 


(1) Drawn-copper alloy tubing traps shall not be used for uri- 
nals. Each trap shall have the manufacturer's name 
stamped legibly in the metal ofthe trap, and each tubing 
trap shall have the gauge of the tubing in addition to the 
manufacturer's name. A trap shall have a smooth and 
uniform interior waterway. 


(2) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Non-water supplied urinals conform- 
ing to ASME A112.19.19-2016, Standard for Vitreous China 
Nonwater Urinals, or reference standards in Table 1701.1 
for non-vitreous ceramic or plastic urinal fixtures. 


TABLE 1002.2 
HORIZONTAL LENGTHS OF TRAP ARMS 
(EXCEPT FOR WATER CLOSETS AND SIMILAR FIXTURES)" 23 | 


TRAP ARM PIPE UM LENGTH MAXIMUM 
DIAMETER (inches) (inches) (inches) 

1⁄4 2% 30 

1% 3 42 

2 4 60 

3 6 72 

4 8 120 
Exceeding 4 2 x Diameter 120 

For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


Notes: 

! Maintain 4 inch per foot slope (20.8 mm/m). 

The developed length between the trap of a water closet or similar fixture 
(measured from the face of the closet flange to the inner edge ofthe vent) | 
and its vent shall not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm). 

Horizontally wet vented bathtubs, showers and similar fixtures shall be 
limited to a maximum of 6 feet (1829 mm) for 177 inch (40 mm) fixture 
drains and 8 feet (2438 mm) for 2 inch (50 mm) fixture drains, maintain- 
ing % inch per foot slope (20.8 mm/m). 


N 


სა 


1003.2 Slip Joint Fittings. A maximum of one approved 
slip joint fitting shall be permitted to be used on the outlet 
side of a trap, and no tubing trap shall be installed without a 
listed tubing trap adapter. Listed plastic trap adapters shall be 
permitted to be used to connect listed metal tubing traps. 


1003.3 Size. The size (nominal diameter) of a trap for a 
given fixture shall be sufficient to drain the fixture rapidly 
but in no case less than nor more than one pipe size larger 
than given in Table 702.1. The trap shall be the same size as 
the trap arm to which it is connected. 


195 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


1004.0 Traps. 


1004.1 Prohibited. No form of trap that depends for its seal 
upon the action of movable parts shall be used. No trap that 
has concealed interior partitions, except those of plastic, glass, 
or similar corrosion-resisting material, shall be used. “S” 
traps, bell traps, and crown-vented traps shall be prohibited. 
No fixture shall be double trapped. Drum and bottle traps 
shall be installed for special conditions. No trap shall be 
installed without a vent, except as otherwise provided in this 
code. 


1004.2 Movable Parts. Bladders, check valves or another 
type of devices with moveable parts shall be prohibited to 
serve as a trap. 


1005.0 Trap Seals. 


1005.1 General. Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of 
not less than 2 inches (51 mm) and not more than 4 inches 
(102 mm), except where a deeper seal 1s found necessary by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Traps shall be set true with 
respect to their liquid seals and, where necessary, they shall 
be protected from freezing. 


1006.0 Floor Drain Traps. 


1006.1 General. Floor drains shall connect into a trap so 
constructed that it can be readily cleaned and ofa size to serve 
efficiently the purpose for which it is intended. The drain inlet 
shall be so located that it is in full view. Where subject to the 
reverse flow of sewage or liquid waste, such drains shall be 
equipped with an approved backwater valve. 


1007.0 Trap Seal Protection. 


10071 General. Floor drain or similar traps directly con- 
nected to the drainage system and subject to infrequent use 
shall be protected with a trap seal primer, except where not 
deemed necessary for safety or sanitation by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. Trap seal primers shall be accessible for 
maintenance. 
1007.2 Trap Seal Primers. Potable water supply trap seal 
| primer valves shall comply with ASSE 1018. Drainage or 
electronic design type trap seal primer devices shall comply 
| with ASSE 1044 or IAPMO PS 76. 


1008.0 Building Traps. 


1008.1 General. Building traps shall not be installed except 
where required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Each 
building trap where installed shall be provided with a cleanout 
and with a relieving vent or fresh-air intake on the inlet side 
of the trap, which needs not be larger than one-half the diam- 
eter of the drain to which it connects. Such relieving vent or 
fresh-air intake shall be carried above grade and terminate in 
a screened outlet located outside the building. 


1009.0 Interceptors (Clarifiers) and Separators. 


1009.1 Where Required. Interceptors (clarifiers) (includ- 
ing grease, oil, sand, solid interceptors, etc.) shall be required 


196 


by the Authority Having Jurisdiction where they are neces- 
sary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing 
grease, flammable wastes, sand, solids, acid or alkaline sub- 
stances, or other ingredients harmful to the building drainage 
system, the public or private sewer, or to public or private 
sewage disposal. A list of acceptable interceptor standards is 
referenced in Table 1009.1. 


TABLE 1009.1 
APPROVED INTERCEPTORS (CLARIFIERS) 
APPLICATION STANDARD 
Fats, Oil, Grease ASME A112.14.3, ASME A112.14.4, 
(FOG) ASME A112.14.6, CSA B481, 
ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1001, 
PDI G-101, PDI G-102 
Solid Waste IAPMO IGC 167 


ASME A112.14.6, IAPMO PS 80, 
PDI G-102 
ASTM D6104, IAPMO IGC 183, 
IAPMO IGC 325 


Non-petroleum Oil 


Petroleum Oil 


1009.2 Approval. The size, type, and location of each inter- 
ceptor (clarifier) or separator shall be approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. Except where otherwise 
specifically permitted, no wastes other than those requiring 
treatment or separation shall be discharged into an intercep- 
tor (clarifier). 


1009.3 Design. Interceptors (clarifiers) for sand and simi- 
lar heavy solids shall be so designed and located as to be read- 
ily accessible for cleaning and shall have a water seal of not 
less than 6 inches (152 mm). 


1009.4 Relief Vent. Interceptors (clarifiers) shall be so 
designed that they will not become air-bound where closed 
covers are used. Each interceptor (clarifier) shall be properly 
vented. 


1009.5 Location. Each interceptor (clarifier) cover shall be 
readily accessible for servicing and maintaining the intercep- 
tor (clarifier) in working and operating condition. The use of 
ladders or the removal of bulky equipment to service inter- 
ceptors (clarifiers) shall constitute a violation of accessibility. 
Location of interceptors (clarifiers) shall be shown on the 
approved building plan. 


1009.6 Maintenance of Interceptors. Interceptors shall 
be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic 
removal of accumulated grease, scum, oil, or other floating 
substances and solids deposited in the interceptor. 

1009.7 Discharge. The waste pipe from oil and sand inter- 
ceptors shall discharge as approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


1010.0 Slaughterhouses, Packing Establishments, 
etc. 


1010.1 General. A fish, fowl, and animal slaughterhouse or 
establishment; a fish, fowl, and meat packing or curing estab- 
lishment; a soap factory, tallow-rendering, fat-rendering, and a 
hide-curing establishment shall be connected to and shall drain 
or discharge into an approved grease interceptor (clarifier). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1010.2 Meat and Poultry Processing Plants. [AGR] 


1010.2.1 Drainage and Plumbing Systems. 
Drainage and plumbing systems shall meet the require- 
ments of Section 724.0. 


1010.2.1.1 Each floor drain shall be equipped with 
a deep-seal trap. 


1010.2.2 The plumbing shall be installed so as to prevent 
sewage from backing up and flooding the floor. 


Exception: Floor drains in areas not regularly washed 
down will be acceptable with deep-seal traps, provided 
that such drains are connected to secondary drainage 
systems discharging into a safe sink or basin (air gap) 
that is properly trapped and vented, and that such drains 
accomplish the objectives and intent of this section. 


1010.2.3 Interceptor traps which are connected with the 
sewer system shall not be near any edible products 
department or in any area where products are unloaded 
from or loaded into vehicles. To facilitate cleaning, such 
traps shall have inclined bottoms and be provided with 
suitable covers. 


1010.3 Collection Centers and Facilities. [AGR] All 
drains shall be properly installed with adequate deep-sealed 
traps of the conventional “Р,” "U" or "S" type and vents. 


1010.4 Horse Meat and Pet Food Establishments. 
[AGR] There shall be an efficient drainage and plumbing 
system for the establishment and premises. All drains and gut- 
ters shall be installed with traps and vents approved by the 
Department. 


1010.5 Draining and Plumbing. [AGR] There shall be 
an efficient drainage and plumbing system for the plant and 
premises. 


1010.5.1 Drainage and Gutters. All drains and gut- 
ters shall be properly installed with approved traps and 
vents. The drainage and plumbing system must permit 
the quick runoff of all water from plant buildings, and of 
surface water around the plant on the premises, and all 
such water shall be disposed of in such a manner as to 
prevent a nuisance or health hazard. 


1010.5.2 Sewage and Plant Waste. The sewer sys- 
tem have adequate slope and capacity to remove readily 
all waste from the various processing operations and to 
minimize, or if possible, prevent stoppage and surcharg- 
ing of the system. When the sewage disposal system is a 
private system which is required to be approved by a 
state or local health authority, the applicant shall fur- 
nish the administrator a letter from the proper health 
authority indicating that the sewage disposal system is 
acceptable to such authority. 


1011.0 Minimum Requirements for Auto Wash Racks. 


1011.1 General. A private or public wash rack or floor or 
slab used for cleaning machinery or machine parts shall be 
adequately protected against storm or surface water and shall 
drain or discharge into an approved interceptor (clarifier). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


1012.0 Commercial and Industrial Laundries. 


1012.1 General. Laundry equipment in commercial and 
industrial buildings that do not have integral strainers shall 
discharge into an interceptor having a wire basket or similar 
device that is removable for cleaning and that will prevent 
passage into the drainage system of solids % of an inch (12.7 
mm) or larger in maximum dimensions, such as string, rags, 
buttons, or other solid materials detrimental to the public sew- 
erage system. 


1013.0 Bottling Establishments. 


1013.1 General. Bottling plants shall discharge their process 
wastes into an interceptor that will provide for the separation 
of broken glass or other solids, before discharging liquid 
wastes into the drainage system. 


1014.0 Grease Interceptors. 


1014.1 General. Where it is determined by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction that waste pretreatment is required, an 
approved type of grease interceptor(s) shall comply with 
ASME A112.14.3, ASME A112.14.4, CSA B481, 
ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1001, PDI G-101, or PDI G-102, and] 
sized in accordance with Section 1014.2.1 or Section 
1014.3.6, shall be installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer’s installation instructions to receive the drainage from 
fixtures or equipment that produce grease-laden waste. 
Grease-laden waste fixtures shall include, but not be limited 
to, sinks and drains, such as floor drains, floor sinks, and other 
fixtures or equipment in serving establishments, such as 
restaurants, cafes, lunch counters, cafeterias, bars and clubs, 
hotels, hospitals, sanitariums, factory or school kitchens, or 
other establishments where grease is introduced into the 
drainage or sewage system in quantities that can effect line 
stoppage or hinder sewage treatment or private sewage dis- 
posal systems. A combination of hydromechanical, gravity 
grease interceptors and engineered systems shall be allowed 
to meet this code and other applicable requirements of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction where space or existing phys- 
ical constraints of existing buildings necessitate such instal- 
lations. A grease interceptor shall not be required for 
individual dwelling units or private living quarters. Water 
closets, urinals, and other plumbing fixtures conveying 
human waste shall not drain into or through the grease inter- 
ceptor. 


1014.1A [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] The Authority Having 
Jurisdiction is the individual official, board, department or 
agency authorized to administer and enforce the sewage 
treatment system in the area of the location of the health facil- 
ity. 

1014.1B [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Grease interceptors 
shall not be installed in food preparation area of the kitchens. 


1014.1C [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Grease interceptors 
shall be installed outside of the kitchen area in location 
affording ease of maintenance and servicing. 


197 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


1014.1.1 Trapped and Vented. Fach fixture discharg- 
ing into a grease interceptor shall be individually trapped 
and vented in an approved manner. 


1014.1.2 Maintenance. Grease interceptors shall be 
maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic 
removal of the accumulated grease and latent material. 
No such collected grease shall be introduced into 
drainage piping or a public or private sewer. Where the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction determines that a grease 
interceptor is not being properly cleaned or maintained, 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the author- 
ity to mandate the installation of additional equipment or 
devices and to mandate a maintenance program. 


1014.1.3 Food Waste Disposers and Dishwash- 
ers. No food waste disposer or dishwasher shall be con- 
nected to or discharge into a grease interceptor. 
Commercial food waste disposers shall be permitted to 
discharge directly into the building's drainage system. 


Exception: Food waste disposers shall be permitted to 
discharge to grease interceptors that are designed to 
receive the discharge of food waste. 


1014.2 Hydromechanical Grease Interceptors. Plumb- 
ing fixtures or equipment connected to a Type A and B hydro- 
mechanical grease interceptor shall discharge through an 
approved type of vented flow control installed in a readily 
accessible and visible location. Flow control devices shall be 
designed and installed so that the total flow through such 
device or devices shall at no time be greater than the rated 
flow of the connected grease interceptor. No flow control 
device having adjustable or removable parts shall be 
approved. The vented flow control device shall be located 
such that no system vent shall be between the flow control 
and the grease interceptor inlet. The vent or air inlet of the 
flow control device shall connect with the sanitary drainage 
vent system, as elsewhere required by this code, or shall ter- 
minate through the roof of the building, and shall not termi- 
nate to the free atmosphere inside the building. 


Exception: Listed grease interceptors with integral flow con- 
trols or restricting devices shall be installed in an accessible 
location in accordance with the manufacturer's installation 
instructions. 


1014.2.1 Capacity. The total capacity in gallons (gal) 
(L) of fixtures discharging into a hydromechanical grease 
interceptor shall not exceed two and one-half times the 
certified gallon per minute (gpm) (L/s) flow rate of the 
interceptor in accordance with Table 1014.2.1. 


For this section, the term “fixture” shall mean and 
include each plumbing fixture, appliance, apparatus, or 
other equipment required to be connected to or dis- 
charged into a grease interceptor by a provision of this 
section. 


1014.2.2 Vent. A vent shall be installed downstream of 
hydromechanical grease interceptors in accordance with 
the requirements of this code. 


198 


TABLE 1014.2.1 
HYDROMECHANICAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR SIZING 


USING GRAVITY FLOW RATES! 


SIZE OF GREASE INTERCEPTOR 
GEN "Меен Meme | Tyo 
PIPE (inches) (gpm)? PERIOD PERIOD 
(gpm) (gpm) 

2 20 20 10 

3 60 75 35 

4 125 150 75 

5 230 250 125 

6 375 400 200 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 

Notes: 

! For interceptor sizing by the fixture capacity see the example below. 

? VAinch slope per foot (20.8 mm/m) based on Manning's formula with fric- 
tion factor N = 0.012. 


EXAMPLE 1014.2.1 
SIZING HYDROMECHANICAL GREASE INTERCEPTOR(S) 
USING FIXTURE CAPACITY 
Step 1: Determine the flow rate from each fixture. 
[Length] X [Width] X [Depth] / [231] = Gallons X [0.75 fill factor] / [Drain 


Period (1 minute or 2 minutes)] 


Step 2: Calculate the total load from fixtures that discharge into 
the interceptor. 


SIZE OF 
GREASE TWO- 
INTERCEPTOR | MINUTE 
FIXTURES Бана ესს. ONE-MINUTE |DRAINAGE 
(9 ) DRAINAGE | PERIOD 
PERIOD (gpm) 
(gpm) 
Compartment = = =; = 
size 
24 inches x 24 
inches x 12 2 44.9 — — 
inches 
Hydrant == 3 — — 
Rated = 2 = = 
Appliance 
— — 49.9 50 25 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, | gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 gallon = 


3.785L 


1014.3 Gravity Grease Interceptors. Required gravity 
grease interceptors shall comply with the provisions of Sec- 
tion 1014.3.1 through Section 1014.3.7. 
1014.3.1 General. The provisions of this section shall 
apply to the design, construction, installation, and testing 
of commercial kitchen gravity grease interceptors. 
1014.3.2 Waste Discharge Requirements. Waste 
discharge in establishments from fixtures and equipment 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


which contain grease, including but not limited to, 
scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, dishwashers, soup ket- 
tles, and floor drains located in areas where grease-con- 
taining materials exist, shall be permitted to be drained 
into the sanitary waste through the interceptor where 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1014.3.2.1 Toilets and Urinals. Toilets, urinals, 
and other similar fixtures shall not drain through the 
interceptor. 


1014.3.2.2 Inlet Pipe. Waste shall enter the inter- 
ceptor through the inlet pipe. 


1014.3.3 Design. Gravity interceptors shall be con- 
structed in accordance with the applicable standard in 
Chapter 17 or the design approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 
1014.3.4 Location. Each grease interceptor shall be so 
installed and connected that it shall be easily accessible 
for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted 
grease. A gravity grease interceptor that complies with 
ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1001 shall not be installed in a 
building where food is handled. Location of the grease 
interceptor shall meet the approval ofthe Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

1014.3.4.1 Interceptors. Interceptors shall be 

placed as close as practical to the fixtures they serve. 


1014.3.4.2 Business Establishment. Each 
business establishment for which a gravity grease 
interceptor is required shall have an interceptor 
which shall serve that establishment unless other- 
wise approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1014.3.4.3 Access. Fach gravity grease intercep- 
tor shall be located to be readily accessible to the 
equipment required for maintenance. 


1014.3.5 Construction Requirements. Gravity 
grease interceptors shall be designed to remove grease 
from effluent and shall be sized in accordance with this 
section. Gravity grease interceptors shall also be 
designed to retain grease until accumulations can be 
removed by pumping the interceptor. When provided, a 
sample box shall be located at the outlet end of gravity 
grease interceptors so that the Authority Having Juris- 
diction can periodically sample effluent quality. 


1014.3.6 Sizing Criteria. The volume of the intercep- 
tor shall be determined by using Table 1014.3.6. Where 
drainage fixture units (DFUs) are not known, the inter- 
ceptor shall be sized based on the maximum DFUs 
allowed for the pipe size connected to the inlet of the 
interceptor. Refer to Table 703.2, Drainage Piping, Hor- 
izontal. 

1014.3.7 Abandoned Gravity Grease Intercep- 
tors. Abandoned grease interceptors shall be pumped 
and filled as required for abandoned sewers and sewage 
disposal facilities in Section 722.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


TABLE 1014.3.6 
GRAVITY GREASE INTERCEPTOR SIZING 


DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS” 3 INTERCEPTOR VOLUME? 
(DFUs) (gallons) 
8 500 
21 750 
35 1000 
90 1250 
172 1500 
216 2000 
307 2500 
342 3000 
428 4000 
576 5000 
720 7500 
2112 10 000 
2640 15 000 
For SI units: 1 gallon = 3.785 L 


Notes: 
! The maximum allowable DFUs plumbed to the kitchen drain lines that 
will be connected to the grease interceptor. 
? This size is based on DFUS, the pipe size from this code; Table 703.2; 
Useful Tables for flow in half-full pipes (ref: Mohinder Nayyar Piping 
Handbook, 3rd Edition, 1992). Based on 30-minute retention time (ref: 
George Tchobanoglous and Metcalf & Eddy. Wastewater Engineering 
Treatment, Disposal, and Reuse, 3rd Ed. 1991 & Ronald Crites and 
George Tchobanoglous. Small and Decentralized Wastewater Manage- 
ment Systems, 1998). Rounded up to nominal interceptor volume. 
Where the flow rate of directly connected fixture(s) or appliance(s) have 
no assigned DFU values, the additional grease interceptor volume shall 
be based on the known flow rate (gpm) (L/s) multiplied by 30 minutes. 


EXAMPLE 1014.3.6 
GRAVITY GREASE INTERCEPTOR SIZING EXAMPLE 
Given: A restaurant with the following fixtures and equip- 
ment. 
One food preparation sink; three-floor drains - one in the food 
prep area, one in the grill area, and one receiving the indirect 
waste from the ice machine and a mop sink. 


Kitchen Drain Line DFU Count (from Table 702.1): 


3 floor drains at 2 DFUs each = 6DFUs 
Mop sink at 3 DFUs each = 3DFUs 
Food prep sink at 3 DFUs each = 3DFUs 
Total = 12 DFUs 


Using Table 1014.3.6, the grease interceptor will be sized at 
750 gallons (2389 L). 


1015.0 FOG (Fats, Oils, and Greases) Disposal Sys- 
tem. 

1015.1 Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide 
the necessary criteria for the sizing, application, and installa- 
tion of FOG disposal systems designated as a pretreatment or 
discharge water quality compliance strategy. 


199 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


1015.2 Components, Materials, and Equipment. FOG 
disposal systems, including components, materials, and 
equipment necessary for the proper function of the system, 
shall comply with ASME A112.14.6. 


1015.3 Sizing and Installation. FOG disposal systems 
shall be sized and installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. 


1015.4 Performance. FOG disposal systems shall produce 
an effluent quality not to exceed 5.84 grains per gallon 
(gr/gal) (100 mg/L) FOG. 


1015.5 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Grease interceptors 
shall not be installed in food preparation area of kitchens. 


1015.6 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Grease interceptors 
shall be installed outside of the kitchen area in location 
affording ease of maintenance and servicing. 


1016.0 Sand Interceptors. 


1016.1 Discharge. Where the discharge of a fixture or drain 
contains solids or semi-solids heavier than water that would 
be harmful to a drainage system or cause a stoppage within 
the system, the discharge shall be through a sand interceptor. 
Multiple floor drains shall be permitted to discharge into one 
sand interceptor. 


1016.2 Authority Having Jurisdiction. Sand interceptors 
are required where the Authority Having Jurisdiction deems 
it advisable to have a sand interceptor to protect the drainage 
system. 


1016.3 Construction and Size. Sand interceptors shall be 
built of brick or concrete, prefabricated coated steel, or other 
watertight material. The interceptor shall have an interior baf- 
fle for full separation of the interceptor into two sections. The 
outlet pipe shall be the same size as the inlet pipe of the sand 
interceptor, the minimum being 3 inches (80 mm), and the 
baffle shall have two openings of the same diameter as the 
outlet pipe and at the same invert as the outlet pipe. These 
openings shall be staggered so that there cannot be a straight 
line flow between the inlet pipe and the outlet pipe. The invert 
of the inlet pipe shall be no lower than the invert of the out- 
let pipe. 

The sand interceptor shall have a minimum dimension 
of 2 square feet (0.2 m?) for the net free opening of the inlet 
section and a minimum depth under the invert of the outlet 
pipe of 2 feet (610 mm). 


For each 5 gpm (0.3 L/s) flow or fraction thereof over 20 
gpm (1.26 L/s), the area of the sand interceptor inlet section 
is to be increased by 1 square foot (0.09 m°). The outlet sec- 
tion shall at all times have a minimum area of 50 percent of 
the inlet section. 


The outlet section shall be covered by a solid removable 
cover, set flush with the finished floor, and the inlet section 
shall have an open grating, set flush with the finished floor 
and suitable for the traffic in the area in which it is located. 
1016.4 Separate Use. Sand and similar interceptors for 
every solid shall be so designed and located as to be readily 
accessible for cleaning, shall have a water seal of not less than 
6 inches (152 mm), and shall be vented. 


200 


1017.0 Oil and Flammable Liquid Interceptors. 


10171 Interceptors Required. Repair garages and gaso- 
line stations with grease racks or grease pits, and factories that 
have oily, flammable, or both types of wastes as a result of 
manufacturing, storage, maintenance, repair, or testing 
processes, shall be provided with an oil or flammable liquid 
interceptor. Floor drains in such locations shall be connected 
directly to oil and flammable liquid interceptors. 


10172 Interceptor Design Alternatives. Oil interceptors 
shall comply with IAPMO IGC 183 or be in accordance with 
Section 1017.3 through Section 1017.4. 


10173 Interceptor Details. Oil and flammable liquid inter- 
ceptors shall be in accordance with the following: 


(1) The separation or vapor compartment shall be independ- 
ently vented to the outer air. Where two or more separa- 
tion or vapor compartments are used, each shall be vented 
to the outer air or shall be permitted to connect to a header 
that is installed at a minimum of 6 inches (152 mm) above 
the spill line of the lowest floor drain and vented inde- 
pendently to the outer air. 


(2) The minimum size ofa flammable vapor vent shall be not | 
less than 2 inches (50 mm), and, where vented through a 
sidewall, the vent shall be not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) 
above the adjacent level at an approved location. 


(3) The interceptor shall be vented on the sewer side and shall | 
not connect to a flammable vapor vent. Oil and flamma- 
ble interceptors shall be provided with gastight cleanout 
covers that shall be readily accessible. 


(4) The waste line shall be not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in | 
diameter with a full-size cleanout to grade. 


(5) Where an interceptor is provided with an overflow, it shall | 
be provided with an overflow line [not less than 2 inches 
(50 mm) in diameter] to an approved waste oil tank hav- 
ing a minimum capacity of 550 gallons (2082 L) and 
meeting the requirements of the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


(a) The waste oil from the separator shall flow by grav- | 
ity or shall be pumped to a higher elevation by an 
automatic pump. 


(b) Pumps shall be adequately sized and accessible. | 


(c) Waste oil tanks shall have а 2 inch (50 mm) mini- | 
mum pump-out connection at grade and an 17^ inch 
(40 mm) minimum vent to atmosphere at an 
approved location not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) 
above grade. 


1017.4 Design of Interceptors. Each manufactured inter- << 
ceptor that is rated shall be stamped or labeled by the manu- 
facturer with an indication of its full discharge rate in gpm 
(L/s). The following shall apply: 

(1) The full discharge rate to such an interceptor shall be 
determined at full flow. Each interceptor shall be rated 
equal to or greater than the incoming flow and shall be 
provided with an overflow line to an underground tank. 

(2) Interceptors not rated by the manufacturer shall have a | 
depth of not less than 2 feet (610 mm) below the invert 
of the discharge drain. The outlet opening shall have not 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TRAPS AND INTERCEPTORS 


less than an 18 inch (457 mm) water seal and shall have 
a minimum capacity as follows: 


(a) Where not more than three motor vehicles are serv- 
iced, stored, or both, interceptors shall have a mini- 
mum capacity of 6 cubic feet (0.2 m?), and 1 cubic 
foot (0.03 m?) of capacity shall be added for each 
vehicle up to 10 vehicles. 

(b) Above 10 vehicles, the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall determine the size of the interceptor 
required. 

(c) Where vehicles are serviced and not stored, inter- 
ceptor capacity shall be based on a net capacity of 1 
cubic foot (0.03 m?) for each 100 square feet (9.29 
т?) of the surface to be drained into the interceptor, 
with a minimum of 6 cubic feet (0.2 m?). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 201 


202 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 11 - STORM DRAINAGE 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 


Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 1AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X X X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X XIX X XIX XX 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 
Chapter/Section 

1101.4 X XX X X X X X 


1101.4.2.1 X 
1101.4.2.2 X Х Ххх 


1101.6 Exception XX 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 203 


204 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 11 
STORM DRAINAGE 


1101.0 General. 


1101.1 Applicability. This chapter shall govern the materi- 
als, design, and installation of storm water drainage systems. 


1101.2 Where Required. Roofs, paved areas, yards, courts, 
courtyards, vent shafts, light wells, or similar areas having 
rainwater, shall be drained into a separate storm sewer system, 
or into a combined sewer system where a separate storm sewer 
system is not available, or to some other place of disposal sat- 
Isfactory to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In the case of 
one- and two-family dwellings, storm water shall be permitted 
to be discharged on flat areas, such as streets or lawns, so long 
as the storm water shall flow away from the building and away 
from adjoining property, and shall not create a nuisance. 


1101.3 Storm Water Drainage to Sanitary Sewer Pro- 
hibited. Storm water shall not be drained into sewers 
intended for sanitary drainage. 


1101.4 Material Uses. Pipe, tube, and fittings conveying 
rainwater shall be of such materials and design as to perform 
their intended function to the satisfaction of the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. Conductors within a vent or shaft shall 
be of cast-iron, galvanized steel, wrought iron, copper, cop- 
per alloy, lead, Schedule 40 ABS DWV, Schedule 40 PVC 
DWYV, stainless steel 304 or 316L [stainless steel 304 pipe and 
fittings shall not be installed underground and shall be kept 
not less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground], or other 
approved materials, and changes in direction shall be in accor- 
dance with the requirements of Section 706.0. ABS and PVC 
DWV piping installations shall be installed in accordance with 
applicable standards referenced in Chapter 17 and the firestop 
protection requirements in the California Building Code. 
Except for individual single-family dwelling units, materials 
exposed within ducts or plenums shall have a flame-spread 
index of not more than 25 and a smoke-developed index of 
not more than 50, where tested in accordance with ASTM E84 
or UL 723. Plastic piping installed in plenums shall be tested 
in accordance with all requirements of ASTM E84 or UL 723. 
Mounting methods, supports and sample sizes of materials for 
testing that are not specified in ASTM E84 or UL 723 shall be 
prohibited. 


[HCD 1 & HCD 2] ABS or PVC installations are limited to 
not more than two stories of areas of residential accommo- 
dation. 


[OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] ABS and PVC installations are not 
allowed. 


1101.4.1 Copper and Copper Alloys. Joints and con- 
nections in copper and copper alloy pipe and tube shall 
be installed in accordance with Section 705.3. 


1101.4.2 Conductors. Conductors installed above- 
ground in buildings shall comply with the applicable 
standards referenced in Table 701.2 for aboveground 
drain, waste, and vent pipe. Conductors installed above- 
ground level shall be of seamless copper water tube, 
Type K, L, or M; Schedule 40 copper pipe or Schedule 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


40 copper alloy pipe; Type DWV copper drainage tube; 
service weight cast-iron soil pipe or hubless cast-iron soil 
pipe; standard weight galvanized steel pipe; stainless 
steel 304 or 316L [stainless steel 304 pipe and fittings 
shall not be installed underground and shall be kept not 
less than 6 inches (152 mm) aboveground], or Schedule 
40 ABS or Schedule 40 PVC plastic pipe. 


1101.4.2.1 [HCD 1] ABS or PVC installations are 
limited to not more than two stories of areas of res- 
idential accommodation. 


1101.4.2.2 [OSHPD 1,2,3,4 & 5] ABS and PVC 
installations are not allowed. 


1101.4.3 Leaders. Leaders installed outside shall com- 
ply with the applicable standards referenced in Table 
701.2 for aboveground drain, waste, and vent pipe; alu- 
minum sheet metal; galvanized steel sheet metal; or cop- 
per sheet metal. 


1101.4.4 Underground Building Storm Drains. 
Underground building storm drains shall comply with 
the applicable standards referenced in Table 701.2 for 
underground drain, waste, and vent pipe. 

1101.4.5 Building Storm Sewers. Building storm 
sewers shall comply with the applicable standards refer- 
enced in Table 701.2 for building sewer pipe. 

1101.4.6 Subsoil Drains. Subsoil drains shall be open 
jointed, perforated, or both and constructed of materials 
in conformance with Table 1101.4.6. 


TABLE 1101.4.6 
MATERIALS FOR SUBSOIL DRAINPIPE AND FITTINGS 


MATERIAL REFERENCED STANDARD(S) 
PE ASTM F667 
PVC ASTM D2729 
Vitrified Clay (Extra strength) ASTM C4, ASTM C700 


1101.5 Expansion Joints Required. Expansion joints or 
sleeves shall be provided where warranted by temperature 
variations or physical conditions. 


1101.6 Subsoil Drains. Subsoil drains shall be provided 
around the perimeter of buildings having basements, cellars, 
crawl spaces, or floors below grade. Such subsoil drains shall 
be permitted to be positioned inside or outside of the footing, 
shall be of perforated or open-jointed approved drain tile or 
pipe, not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter, and shall be 
laid in gravel, slag, crushed rock, approved % of an inch (19.1 
mm) crushed, recycled glass aggregate, or other approved 
porous material with not less than 4 inches (102 mm) sur- 
rounding the pipe. Filter media shall be provided for exterior 
subsoil piping. 

Exception: [HCD 1 & HCD 2] Subsoil drains are mandatory 
only when required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction due 
to geological conditions. 


205 


STORM DRAINAGE 


1101.6.1 Discharge. Subsoil drains shall be piped to a 
storm drain, to an approved water course, to the front 
street curb or gutter, to an alley, or the discharge from 
the subsoil drains shall be conveyed to the alley by a con- 
crete gutter. Where a continuously flowing spring or 
groundwater 1s encountered, subsoil drains shall be piped 
to a storm drain or an approved water course. 


1101.6.2 Sump. Where it is not possible to convey the 
drainage by gravity, subsoil drains shall discharge to an 
accessible sump provided with an approved automatic 
electric pump. The sump shall be not less than 15 inches 
(381 mm) in diameter, 18 inches (457 mm) in depth, and 
provided with a fitted cover. The sump pump shall have 
an adequate capacity to discharge water coming into the 
sump as it accumulates to the required discharge point, 
and the capacity of the pump shall be not less than 15 
gallons per minute (gpm) (0.95 L/s). The discharge pip- 
ing from the sump pump shall be not less than 1^ inches 
(40 mm) in diameter and have a union or other approved 
quick-disconnect assembly to make the pump accessible 
for servicing. 


1101.6.3 Splash Blocks. For separate dwellings not 
serving continuously flowing springs or groundwater, the 
sump discharge pipe shall be permitted to discharge onto 
a concrete splash block with a minimum length of 24 
inches (610 mm). This pipe shall be within 4 inches (102 
mm) of the splash block and positioned to direct the flow 
parallel to the recessed line of the splash block. 


1101.6.4 Backwater Valve. Subsoil drains subject to 
backflow where discharging into a storm drain shall be 
provided with a backwater valve in the drain line so 
located as to be accessible for inspection and maintenance. 


1101.6.5 Open Area. Nothing in Section 1101.6 shall 
prevent drains that serve either subsoil drains or areaways 
of a detached building from discharging to a properly 
graded open area, provided that: 


(1) They do not serve continuously flowing springs or 
groundwater. 


(2) The point of discharge is not less than 10 feet (3048 
mm) from a property line. 

(3) It is impracticable to discharge such drains to a storm 
drain, to an approved water course, to the front street 
curb or gutter, or to an alley. 


1101.7 Building Subdrains. Building subdrains located 
below the public sewer level shall discharge into a sump or 
receiving tank, the contents of which shall be automatically 
lifted and discharged into the drainage system as required for 
building sumps. 

1101.8 Areaway Drains. Open subsurface space adjacent 
to a building, serving as an entrance to the basement or cel- 
lar ofa building, shall be provided with a drain or drains. The 
areaway drains shall be not less than 2 inches (50 mm) in 
diameter for areaways at a maximum of 100 square feet (9.29 
m°) in area, and shall be discharged in the manner provided 
for subsoil drains not serving continuously flowing springs 
or groundwater (see Section 1101.6.1). Areaways exceeding 
100 square feet (9.29 m?) shall not drain into subsoil drains. 


206 


The drains for areaways exceeding 100 square feet (9.29 m?) 
shall be sized in accordance with Table 1103.2. 


1101.9 Window Areaway Drains. Window areaways at a 
maximum of 10 square feet (0.93 m?) in area shall be per- 
mitted to discharge to the subsoil drains through a 2 inch (50 
mm) diameter pipe. However, window areaways exceeding 
10 square feet (0.93 m?) in area shall be handled in the man- 
ner provided for entrance areaways (see Section 1101.8). 


1101.10 Filling Stations and Motor Vehicle Washing 
Establishments. Public filling stations and motor vehicle 
washing establishments shall have the paved area sloped 
toward sumps or gratings within the property lines. Curbs not 
less than 6 inches (152 mm) high shall be placed where 
required to direct water to gratings or sumps. 


1101.11 Paved Areas. Where the occupant creates surface 
water drainage, the sumps, gratings, or floor drains shall be 
piped to a storm drain or an approved water course. 


1101.12 Roof Drainage. Roof drainage shall comply with 
Section 1101.12.1 and Section 1101.12.2. 


1101.12.1 Primary Roof Drainage. Roof areas of a 
building shall be drained by roof drains or gutters. The 
location and sizing of drains and gutters shall be coordi- 
nated with the structural design and pitch of the roof. 
Unless otherwise required by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction, roof drains, gutters, vertical conductors or leaders, 
and horizontal storm drains for primary drainage shall be 
sized based on a storm of 60 minutes duration and 100 
year return period. Refer to Table D 101.1 (in Appendix 
D) for 100 years, 60-minute storms at various locations. 


1101.12.2 Secondary Drainage. Secondary (emer- 
gency) roof drainage shall be provided by one of the 
methods specified in Section 1101.12.2.1 or Section 
1101.12.2.2. 


1101.12.2.1 Roof Scuppers or Open Side. Sec- 
ondary roof drainage shall be provided by an open- 
sided roof or scuppers where the roof perimeter 
construction extends above the roof in such a man- 
ner that water will be entrapped. An open-sided roof 
or scuppers shall be sized to prevent the depth of 
ponding water from exceeding that for which the 
roof was designed as determined by Section 
1101.12.1. Scupper openings shall be not less than 4 
inches (102 mm) high and have a width equal to the 
circumference ofthe roof drain required for the area 
served, sized in accordance with Table 1103.1. 


1101.12.2.2 Secondary Roof Drain. Secondary 
roof drains shall be provided. The secondary roof 
drains shall be located not less than 2 inches (51 
mm) above the roof surface. The maximum height 
of the roof drains shall be a height to prevent the 
depth of ponding water from exceeding that for 
which the roof was designed as determined by Sec- 
tion 1101.12.1. The secondary roof drains shall con- 
nect to a piping system in accordance with Section 
1101.12.2.2.1 or Section 1101.12.2.2.2. 


1101.12.2.2.1 Separate Piping System. 
The secondary roof drainage system shall be a 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


separate system of piping, independent of the 
primary roof drainage system. The discharge 
shall be above grade, in a location observable 
by the building occupants or maintenance per- 
sonnel. Secondary roof drain systems shall be 
sized in accordance with Section 1101.12.1 
based on the rainfall rate for which the primary 
system is sized. 


1101.12.2.2.2 Combined System. The sec- 
ondary roof drains shall connect to the vertical 
piping of the primary storm drainage conductor 
downstream of the last horizontal offset located 
below the roof. The primary storm drainage 
system shall connect to the building storm water 
that connects to an underground public storm 
sewer. The combined secondary and primary 
roof drain systems shall be sized in accordance 
with Section 1103.0 based on double the rain- 
fall rate for the local area. 


1101.13 Cleanouts. Cleanouts for building storm drains 
shall comply with the requirements of Section 719.0 of this 
code. 


1101.13.1 Rain Leaders and Conductors. Rain 
leaders and conductors connected to a building storm 
sewer shall have a cleanout installed at the base of the 

I leader or conductor before it connects to the horizontal 
drain. 


1101.14 Rainwater Sumps. Rainwater sumps serving 
“public use" occupancy buildings shall be provided with dual 
pumps arranged to function alternately in the case of over- 
load or mechanical failure. Pumps rated 600 V or less shall 
comply with UL 778 and shall be installed in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


1101.15 Traps on Storm Drains and Leaders. Leaders 
and storm drains, where connected to a combined sewer, shall 
be trapped. Floor and area drains connected to a storm drain 
shall be trapped. 


Exception: Traps shall not be required where roof drains, rain 
leaders, and other inlets are at locations permitted under Sec- 
tion 906.0, Vent Termination. 


1101.15.1 Where Not Required. No trap shall be 
required for leaders or conductors that are connected to 
a sewer carrying storm water exclusively. 


1101.15.2 Trap Size. Traps, where installed for indi- 
vidual conductors, shall be the same size as the horizon- 
tal drain to which they are connected. 


1101.15.3 Method of Installation of Combined 
Sewer. Individual storm-water traps shall be installed 
on the stormwater drain branch serving each storm-water 
inlet, or a single trap shall be installed in the main storm 
drain just before its connection with the combined build- 
ing sewer. Such traps shall be provided with an accessi- 
ble cleanout on the outlet side of the trap. 
1101.16 Leaders, Conductors, and Connections. 
Leaders or conductors shall not be used as soil, waste, or vent 
pipes nor shall soil, waste, or vent pipes be used as leaders or 
conductors. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


STORM DRAINAGE 


1101.16.1 Protection of Leaders. Leaders installed 
along alleyways, driveways, or other locations where 
exposed to damage shall be protected by metal guards, 
recessed into the wall, or constructed from the ferrous 
pipe. 

1101.16.2 Combining Storm with Sanitary 
Drainage. The sanitary and storm drainage system of a 
building shall be entirely separate, except where a com- 
bined sewer is used, in which case the building storm drain 
shall be connected in the same horizontal plane through a 
single wye fitting to the combined building sewer not less 
than 10 feet (3048 mm) downstream from a soil stack. 


1102.0 Roof Drains. 


1102.1 Applications. Roof drains shall be constructed of 
aluminum, cast-iron, copper alloy of not more than 15 per- 
cent zinc, leaded nickel bronze, stainless steel, ABS, PVC, 
polypropylene, polyethylene, or nylon and shall comply with 
ASME A112.3.1 or ASME A112.6.4. 


1102.2 Dome Strainers Required. Roof drains shall have 
domed strainers. 


Exception: Roof drain strainers for use on sun decks, park- 
ing decks, and similar areas that are normally serviced and 
maintained, shall be permitted to be of the flat surface type. 
Such roof drain strainers shall be level with the deck. 


1102.3 Roof Drain Flashings. The connection between 
the roof and roof drains that pass through the roof and into 
the interior of the building shall be made watertight by the 
use of proper flashing material. 

1102.3.1 Lead Flashing. Where lead flashing mate- 


rial is used, it shall be not less than 4 pounds per square 
foot (Ib/ft?) (19 kg/m?). 


1102.3.2 Copper Flashing. Where copper flashing 
material is used, it shall be not less than 12 ounces per 
square foot (oz/ft)) (3.7 kg/m?). 


1103.0 Size of Leaders, Conductors, and Storm 
Drains. 


1103.1 Vertical Conductors and Leaders. Vertical con- 
ductors and leaders shall be sized by the maximum projected 
roof area and Table 1103.1. 


1103.2 Size of Horizontal Storm Drains and Sewers. 
The size of building storm drains, or building storm sewers or 
their horizontal branches shall be based on the maximum pro- 
jected roof or paved area to be handled and Table 1103.2. 
1103.3 Size of Roof Gutters. The size of semi-circular 
gutters shall be based on the maximum projected roof area 
and Table 1103.3. 
1103.4 Side Walls Draining onto a Roof. Where verti- 
cal walls project above a roof to permit storm water to drain 
into the roof area below, the adjacent roof area shall be per- 
mitted to be computed from Table 1103.1 as follows: 
(1) For one wall — add 50 percent of the wall area to the roof 
area figures. 
(2) For two adjacent walls of equal height — add 35 percent 
of the total wall areas. 


207 


STORM DRAINAGE 


TABLE 1103.1 
SIZING ROOF DRAINS, LEADERS, AND 
VERTICAL RAINWATER PIPING?? 


SIZE OF 
DRAIN, MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HORIZONTAL PROJECTED ROOF AREAS AT VARIOUS RAINFALL RATES 
FLOW 
LEADER, (square feet) 
OR PIPE 
inches gpm! 1(in/h) | 2(in/h) | 3(in/h) | 4(in/h) | 5(in/h) | 6(in/h) | 7(in/h) | 8(in/h) | 9(in/h) | 10(in/h) | 11 (in/h) | 12 (in/h) 
2 30 2880 1440 960 720 575 480 410 360 320 290 260 240 
92 8800 4400 2930 2200 1760 1470 1260 1100 980 880 800 730 
4 192 18400 | 9200 6130 4600 3680 3070 2630 2300 2045 1840 1675 1530 
5 360 34600 | 17300 | 11 530 8650 6920 5765 4945 4325 3845 3460 3145 2880 
6 563 54000 | 27000 | 17995 | 13500 | 10800 | 9000 7715 6750 6000 5400 4910 4500 
8 1208 | 116000] 58000 | 38660 | 29000 | 23 200 | 19315 | 16570 | 14500 | 12890 | 11600 | 10545 9600 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 inch per hour = 25.4 mm/h, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m? 


Notes: 


! Maximum discharge capacity, gpm (L/s) with approximately 154 inch (44 mm) head of water at the drain. 
? For rainfall rates other than those listed, determine the allowable roof area by dividing the area given in the 1 inch per hour (25.4 mm/h) column by the 


desired rainfall rate. 


? Vertical piping shall be round, square, or rectangular. Square pipe shall be sized to enclose its equivalent round pipe. Rectangular pipe shall have not less 
than the same cross-sectional area as its equivalent round pipe, except that the ratio of its side dimensions shall not exceed 3 to 1. 


(3) For two adjacent walls of unequal height — add 35 per- 
cent of the total common height and add 50 percent of 
the remaining height of the highest wall. 

(4) Two opposite walls of same height — add no additional 
area. 

(5) Two opposite walls of differing heights — add 50 percent 
of the wall area above the top of the lower wall. 

(6) Walls on three sides — add 50 percent of the area of the 
inner wall below the top of the lowest wall, plus an 
allowance for the area of the wall above the top of the 
lowest wall, in accordance with Section 1103.4(3) and 
Section 1103.4(5) above. 


(7) Walls on four sides — no allowance for wall areas below 
the top of the lowest wall — add for areas above the top 
of the lowest wall in accordance with Section 1103.4(1), 
Section 1103.4(3), Section 1103.4(5), and Section 
1103.4(6) above. 


1104.0 Values for Continuous Flow. 

1104.1 General. Where there is a continuous or semi-con- 
tinuous discharge into the building storm drain or building 
storm sewer, as from a pump, ejector, air-conditioning plant, 
or similar device, 1 gpm (0.06 L/s) of such discharge shall be 
computed as being equivalent to 24 square feet (2.2 m?) of 
roof area, based upon a rate of rainfall of 4 inches per hour 
(in/h) (102 mm/h). 


1105.0 Controlled-Flow Roof Drainage. 

1105.1 Application. Instead of sizing the storm drainage 
system in accordance with Section 1103.0, the roof drainage 
shall be permitted to be sized by controlled flow and storage 
of the storm water on the roof, provided the following condi- 
tions are met: 


208 


(1) The water from a 25-year frequency storm shall not be 
stored on the roof exceeding 24 hours. 


(2) During the storm, the water depth on the roof shall not 
exceed the depths specified in Table 1105.1(1). 


(3) Notless than two drains shall be installed in roof areas of 
10 000 square feet (929 m?) or less, and not less than one 
additional drain shall be installed for each 10 000 square 
feet (929 m?) of roof area exceeding 10 000 square feet 
(929 m?). 

(4) Each roof drain shall have a precalibrated, fixed (non- 
adjustable), and proportional weir (notched) in a standing 
water collar inside the strainer. No mechanical devices 
or valves shall be permitted. 


(5) Pipe sizing shall be based on the pre-calibrated rate of 
flow (gpm) (L/s) of the pre-calibrated weir for the max- 
imum allowable water depth, and Table 1103.1 and 
Table 1103.2. 


(6) The height of stones or other granular material above the 
waterproofed surface shall not be considered in water 
depth measurement, and the roof surface in the vicinity 
of the drain shall not be recessed to create a reservoir. 


(7) Roof design, where controlled-flow roof drainage is 
used, shall be such that the design roof live load is not 
less than 30 lb/ft? (146 kg/m?) to provide a safety factor 
exceeding the 15 lb/ft? (73 kg/m?) represented by the 
depth of water stored on the roof in accordance with 
Table 1105.1(1). 

(8) Scuppers shall be provided in parapet walls. The distance 
of scupper bottoms above the roof level at the drains shall 
not exceed the maximum distances specified in Table 
1105.1(2). 

(9) Scupper openings shall be not less than 4 inches (102 
mm) high and have a width equal to the circumference of 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


the roof drain required for the area served, sized in accor- 
dance with Table 1103.1. 

(10) Flashings shall extend above the top of the scuppers. 

(11) At a wall or parapet, 45 degree (0.79 rad) cants shall be 
installed. 

(12) Separate storm and sanitary drainage systems shall be 
provided within the building. 


(13) Calculations for the roof drainage system shall be sub- 
mitted along with the plans to the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction for approval. 


TABLE 1105.1(1) 
CONTROLLED-FLOW MAXIMUM ROOF WATER DEPTH 


MAXIMUM WATER DEPTH AT 


ROOF RISE* DRAIN 
(inches) (inches) 
Flat 3 
2 4 
4 5 
6 6 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 

* Vertical measurement from the roof surface at the drain to the highest 
point of the roof surface served by the drain, ignoring a local depression 
immediately adjacent to the drain. 


TABLE 1105.1(2) 
DISTANCE OF SCUPPER BOTTOMS ABOVE ROOF 


ROOF RISE* ABOVE ROOF LEVEL 
(inches) у, 
Flat 3 
2 4 
4 5 
6 6 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 

* Vertical measurement from the roof surface at the drain to the highest 
point of the roof surface served by the drain, ignoring a local depression 
immediately adjacent to the drain. 


1105.2 Setback Roofs. Drains on setback roofs shall be 

permitted to be connected to the controlled-flow drainage sys- 

tems provided: 

(1) The setback is designed for storing water, or 

(2) The square footage of the setback drainage area is con- 
verted as outlined in Section 1105.0 to gpm, and the 
storm-water pipe sizes in the controlled-flow system are 
based on the sum of the loads. 

(3) The branch from each of the roof drains that are not pro- 


vided with controlled flow shall be sized in accordance 
with Table 1103.1. 


1106.0 Engineered Storm Drainage System. 


1106.1 General. The design and sizing of a storm drainage 
system shall be permitted to be determined by accepted engi- 
neering practices. The system shall be designed by a regis- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


STORM DRAINAGE 


tered design professional and approved in accordance with 
Section 301.5. 


1106.2 Siphonic Roof Drainage Systems. The design of 
a siphonic roof drainage system shall comply with 
ASPE/ANSI 45. 


1106.3 Siphonic Roof Drains. Siphonic roof drains shall 
comply with ASME A112.6.9. 


1107.0 Testing. 


1107.1 Testing Required. New building storm drainage 
systems and parts of existing systems that have been altered, 
extended, or repaired shall be tested in accordance with Sec- 
tion 1107.2.1 or Section 1107.2.2 to disclose leaks and 
defects. 


11072 Methods of Testing Storm Drainage Systems. 
Except for outside leaders and perforated or open-jointed 
drain tile, the piping of storm drain systems shall be tested 
upon completion of the rough piping installation by water or 
air, except that plastic pipe shall not be tested with air, and 
proved tight. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be per- 
mitted to require the removal of cleanout plugs to ascertain 
whether the pressure has reached parts of the system. One of 
the following test methods shall be used in accordance with 
Section 1107.2.1 through Section 1107.2.3. 


1107.2.1 Water Test. After piping has been installed, the 
water test shall be applied to the drainage system, either 
to the entire system or sections. Where the test is applied 
to the entire system, all openings in the piping shall be 
tightly closed except for the highest opening, and the sys- 
tem shall be filled with water to the point of overflow. 
Where the system is tested in sections, each opening shall 
be tightly plugged except for the highest opening of the 
section under test, and each section shall be filled with 
water, but no section shall be tested with less than a 10 
foot (3048 mm) head of water. In testing successive sec- 
tions, not less than the upper 10 feet (3048 mm) of the 
next preceding section shall be tested so that no joint of 
pipe in the building except the uppermost 10 feet (3048 
mm) ofa roof drainage system, which shall be filled with 
water to the flood level of the uppermost roof drain, shall 
have been submitted to a test of less than 10 foot (3048 
mm) head of water. The water shall be kept in the system 
or the portion of the test for not less than 15 minutes 
before inspection starts; the system shall then be tight. 


1107.2.2 Air Test. The air test shall be made by attach- 
ing an air compressor testing apparatus to a suitable 
opening after closing other inlets and outlets to the sys- 
tem, forcing air into the system until there is a uniform 
gauge pressure of 5 pounds-force per square inch (psi) 
(34 kPa) or sufficient pressure to balance a column of 
mercury 10 inches (34 kPa) in height. This pressure shall 
be held without the introduction of additional air for not 
less than 15 minutes. 


11072.3 Exceptions. Where circumstances exist that 
make air and water tests described in Section 1107.2.1 
and Section 1107.2.2 impractical, see Section 105.3. 


209 


STORM DRAINAGE 


TABLE 1103.2 
SIZING OF HORIZONTAL RAINWATER PIPING" 2 


SIZE OF PIPE (Vo ires foot MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HORIZONTAL rere Aa AREAS AT VARIOUS RAINFALL RATES 
slope) 
inches gpm 1 (in/h) 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 34 3288 1644 1096 822 657 548 
4 78 7520 3760 2506 1880 1504 1253 
5 139 13 360 6680 4453 3340 2672 2227 
6 222 21 400 10 700 7133 5350 4280 3566 
8 478 46 000 23 000 15 330 11 500 9200 7670 
10 860 82 800 41 400 277 600 20 700 16 580 13 800 
12 1384 133 200 66 600 44 400 33 300 26 650 22 200 
15 2473 238 000 119 000 79 333 59 500 47 600 39 650 
SIZE OF PIPE (м Eh er foot MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HORIZONTAL EE AREAS AT VARIOUS RAINFALL RATES 
slope) 
inches gpm 1 (in/h) 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 48 4640 2320 1546 1160 928 773 
4 110 10 600 5300 3533 2650 2120 1766 
5 196 18 880 9440 6293 4720 3776 3146 
6 314 30 200 15 100 10 066 7550 6040 5033 
8 677 65 200 32 600 21 733 16 300 13 040 10 866 
10 1214 116 800 58 400 38 950 29 200 23 350 19 450 
12 1953 188 000 94 000 62 600 47 000 37 600 31 350 
15 3491 336 000 168 000 112 000 84 000 67 250 56 000 
SIZE OF PIPE (e ce foot MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE HORIZONTAL о AREAS AT VARIOUS RAINFALL RATES 
slope) 
inches gpm 1 (in/h) 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 68 6576 3288 2192 1644 1310 1096 
4 156 15 040 7520 5010 3760 3010 2500 
5 278 26 720 13 360 8900 6680 5320 4450 
6 445 42 800 21 400 14 267 10 700 8580 7140 
8 956 92 000 46 000 30 650 23 000 18 400 15 320 
10 1721 165 600 82 800 55 200 41 400 33150 27 600 
12 2768 266 400 133 200 88 800 66 600 53 200 44 400 
15 4946 476 000 238 000 158 700 119 000 95 200 79 300 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, % inch per foot = 10.4 mm/m, 1 inch per hour = 25.4 mm/h, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m? 


Notes: 
! The sizing data for horizontal piping are based on the pipes flowing full. 
? For rainfall rates other than those listed, determine the allowable roof area by dividing the area given in the 1 inch per hour (25.4 mm/h) column by the 


desired rainfall rate. 


210 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1103.3 
SIZE OF GUTTERS 


STORM DRAINAGE 


DIAMETER OF GUTTER 
(^e inch per foot slope) 


MAXIMUM RAINFALL RATES BASED ON ROOF AREA 


(square feet) 


inches 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 340 226 170 136 113 
4 720 480 360 288 240 
5 1250 834 625 500 416 
6 1920 1280 960 768 640 
7 2760 1840 1380 1100 918 
8 3980 2655 1990 1590 1325 
10 7200 4800 3600 2880 2400 
DIAMETER OF GUTTER MAXIMUM RAINFALL RATES BASED ON ROOF AREA 
(V6 inch per foot slope) (square feet) 
inches 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 480 320 240 192 160 
4 1020 681 510 408 340 
5 1760 1172 880 704 587 
6 2720 1815 1360 1085 905 
7 3900 2600 1950 1560 1300 
8 5600 3740 2800 2240 1870 
10 10 200 6800 5100 4080 3400 
DIAMETER OF GUTTER MAXIMUM RAINFALL RATES BASED ON ROOF AREA 
(^^ inch per foot slope) (square feet) 
inches 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 680 454 340 272 226 
4 1440 960 720 576 480 
3 2500 1668 1250 1000 834 
6 3840 2560 1920 1536 1280 
7 5520 3680 2760 2205 1840 
8 7960 5310 3980 3180 2655 
10 14 400 9600 7200 5750 4800 
DIAMETER OF GUTTER MAXIMUM RAINFALL RATES BASED ON ROOF AREA 
(Ve inch per foot slope) (square feet) 
inches 2 (in/h) 3 (in/h) 4 (in/h) 5 (in/h) 6 (in/h) 
3 960 640 480 384 320 
4 2040 1360 1020 816 680 
5 3540 2360 1770 1415 1180 
6 5540 3695 2770 2220 1850 
7 7800 5200 3900 3120 2600 
8 11 200 7460 5600 4480 3730 
10 20 000 13 330 10 000 8000 6660 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, Ив inch per foot = 5.2 mm/m, 1 inch per hour = 25.4 mm/h, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m? 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


211 


212 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 12 - FUEL GAS PIPING 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM 


| 1|2 10C #C555590C 118231456 


Adopt Entire Chapter X XX XXX 1 XI XI X XI X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X X| X 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


BSCC | DPH | AGR ОМ СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


Chapter/Section 
1201.1 X 
1211.8 X X X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 213 


214 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 12 
FUEL GAS PIPING 


1201.0 General. 


1201.1 Applicability. The regulations of this chapter shall 
govern the installation of fuel gas piping in or in connection 
with a building, structure or within the property lines of prem- 
ises up to 5 pounds-force per square inch (psi) (34 kPa) for 
natural gas and 10 psi (69 kPa) for undiluted propane, other 
than service pipe. Fuel oil piping systems connected to oil- 
burning equipment shall be installed in accordance with 
NFPA 31. Fuel oil piping systems connected to internal com- 
bustion engines and gas turbines shall be installed in accor- 
dance with NFPA 37. 


1202.0 Coverage of Piping System. 


1202.1 General. Coverage of piping systems shall extend 
from the point of delivery to the appliance connections. For 
other than undiluted liquefied petroleum gas (LP-Gas) sys- 
tems, the point of delivery shall be the outlet of the service 
meter assembly or the outlet of the service regulator or serv- 
ice shutoff valve where no meter is provided. For undiluted 
LP-Gas systems, the point of delivery shall be considered to 
be the outlet of the final pressure regulator, exclusive of line 
gas regulators where no meter is installed. Where a meter is 
installed, the point of delivery shall be the outlet of the meter. 
[NFPA 54:1.1.1.1(A)] 

1202.2 Piping System Requirements. Requirements for 

piping systems shall include design, materials, components, 

fabrication, assembly, installation, testing, inspection, opera- 
tion, and maintenance. [NFPA 54:1.1.1.1(E)] 

[1202.3 Applications. This chapter shall not apply to the 
following items: 

(1) Portable LP-Gas appliances and equipment of all types 
that are not connected to a fixed fuel piping system. 

(2) Installation of appliances such as brooders, dehydrators, 
dryers, and irrigation equipment used for agricultural 
purposes. 

(3) Raw material (feedstock) applications except for piping 
to special atmosphere generators. 

(4) Oxygen-fuel gas cutting and welding systems. 

(5) Industrial gas applications using such gases as acetylene 
and acetylenic compounds, hydrogen, ammonia, carbon 
monoxide, oxygen, and nitrogen. 

(6) Petroleum refineries, pipeline compressor or pumping 
stations, loading terminals, compounding plants, refin- 
ery tank farms, and natural gas processing plants. 

(7) Large integrated chemical plants or portions of such 
plants where flammable or combustible liquids or gases 
are produced by chemical reactions or used in chemical 
reactions. 

(8) LP-Gas installations at utility gas plants. 

(9) Liquefied natural gas (LNG) installations. 

(10) Fuel gas piping in electric utility power plants. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(11)Proprietary items of equipment, apparatus, or instru- 
ments such as gas-generating sets, compressors, and 
calorimeters. 


(12) LP-Gas equipment for vaporization, gas mixing, and gas 
manufacturing. 


(13) LP-Gas piping for buildings under construction or reno- 
vations that is not to become part of the permanent build- 
ing piping system—that is, temporary fixed piping for 
building heat. 

(14)Installation of LP-Gas systems for railroad switch heat- 
ing. 

(15)Installation of LP-Gas and compressed natural gas 
(CNG) systems on vehicles. 


(16) Gas piping, meters, gas pressure regulators, and other 
appurtenances used by the serving gas supplier in distri- 
bution of gas, other than undiluted LP-Gas. 


(17) Building design and construction, except as specified 
herein. 


(18) Fuel gas systems on recreational vehicles manufactured 
in accordance with NFPA 1192. 


(19) Fuel gas systems using hydrogen as a fuel. 
(20) Construction of appliances. {NFPA 54:1.1.1.2} 


1203.0 Inspection. 


1203.1 Inspection Notification. Upon completion of the 
installation, alteration, or repair of gas piping, and prior to the 
use thereof, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be noti- 
fied that such gas piping 1s ready for inspection. 


1203.2 Excavation. Excavations required for the installa- 
tion of underground piping shall be kept open until the piping 
has been inspected and approved. Where such piping is cov- 
ered or concealed before such approval, it shall be exposed 
upon the direction of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1203.3 Type of Inspections. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall make the following inspections and either shall 
approve that portion of the work as completed or shall notify 
the permit holder wherein the same fails to be in accordance 
with this code. 


1203.3.1 Rough Piping Inspection. This inspection 
shall be made after gas piping authorized by the permit 
has been installed and before such piping has been cov- 
ered or concealed or fixture or appliance has been 
attached thereto. This inspection shall include a deter- 
mination that the gas piping size, material, and installa- 
tion meet the requirements of this code. 


1203.3.2 Final Piping Inspection. This inspection 
shall be made after piping authorized by the permit has 
been installed, and after portions, thereof that are to be 
covered or concealed are so concealed, and before fix- 
ture, appliance, or shutoff valve has been attached thereto. 


215 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


This inspection shall comply with Section 1213.1. Test 
gauges used in conducting tests shall be in accordance 
with Section 318.0. 


1203.4 Inspection Waived. In cases where the work 
authorized by the permit consists of a minor installation of 
additional piping to piping already connected to a gas meter, 
the preceding inspections shall be permitted to be waived at 
the discretion of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In this 
event, the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall make such 
inspection as deemed advisable to be assured that the work 
has been performed in accordance with the intent of this code. 


1204.0 Certificate of Inspection. 


1204.1 Issuance. Whereupon final piping inspection, the 
installation is found to be in accordance with the provisions 
of this code, a certificate of inspection shall be permitted to be 
Issued by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1204.2 Gas Supplier. A copy of the certificate of such final 
piping inspection shall be issued to the serving gas supplier 
supplying gas to the premises. 


1204.3 Unlawful. It shall be unlawful for a serving gas sup- 
plier, or person is furnishing gas, to turn on or cause to be 
turned on, a fuel gas or a gas meter or meters, until such cer- 
tificate of final inspection, as herein provided, has been issued. 


1205.0 Authority to Render Gas Service. 


1205.1 Authorized Personnel. It shall be unlawful for a 
person, firm, or corporation, excepting an authorized agent 
or employee of a person, firm, or corporation engaged in the 
business of furnishing or supplying gas and whose service 
pipes supply or connect with the particular premises, to turn 
on or reconnect gas service in or on a premises where and 
when gas service is, at the time, not being rendered. 


1205.2 Outlets. It shall be unlawful to turn on or connect gas 
in or on the premises unless outlets are securely connected to 
gas appliances or capped or plugged with screw joint fittings. 


1206.0 Authority to Disconnect. 


1206.1 Disconnection. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
or the serving gas supplier is hereby authorized to disconnect 
gas piping or appliance or both that shall be found not to be 
in accordance with the requirements of this code or that are 
found defective and in such condition as to endanger life or 
property. 

1206.2 Notice. Where such disconnection has been made, a 
notice shall be attached to such gas piping or appliance or 
both that shall state the same has been disconnected, together 
with the reasons thereof. 


1206.3 Capped Outlets. It shall be unlawful to remove or 
disconnect gas piping or gas appliance without capping or 
plugging with a screw joint fitting, the outlet from which said 
pipe or appliance was removed. Outlets to which gas appli- 
ances are not connected shall be left capped and gastight on 
a piping system that has been installed, altered, or repaired. 
Exception: Where an approved listed quick-disconnect device 
1s used. 


216 


1207.0 Temporary Use of Gas. 


1207.1 General. Where temporary use of gas is desired, and 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction deems the use necessary, a 
permit shall be permitted to be issued for such use for a period 
not to exceed that designated by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction, provided that such gas piping system otherwise is in 
accordance with the requirements of this code regarding 
material, sizing, and safety. 


1208.0 Gas Piping System Design, Materials, and 
Components. 


1208.1 Installation of Piping System. Where required 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, a piping sketch or plan 
shall be prepared before proceeding with the installation. The 
plan shall show the proposed location of piping, the size of 
different branches, the various load demands, and the loca- 
tion of the point of delivery. [NFPA 54:5.1.1] 


1208.1.1 Addition to Existing System. When addi- 
tional appliances are being connected to a gas piping sys- 
tem, the existing piping shall be checked to determine 
whether it has adequate capacity. If the capacity of the 
system is determined to be inadequate for the additional 
appliances, the existing system shall be enlarged as 
required, or separate gas piping of adequate capacity 
shall be provided. [NFPA 54:5.1.2] 


1208.2 Interconnections Supplying Separate Users. ТЯ 


Where two ог more meters, ог two ог more service regulators 
where meters are not provided, are located on the same prem- 
ises and supply separate users, the gas piping systems shall 
not be interconnected on the outlet side of the meters or serv- 
ice regulators. [NFPA 54:5.2.1] 


1208.2.1 Interconnections for Standby Fuels. 
Where a supplementary gas for standby use is connected 
downstream from a meter or a service regulator where a 
meter is not provided, equipment to prevent backflow 
shall be installed. A three-way valve installed to admit 
the standby supply and at the same time shut off the reg- 
ular supply shall be permitted to be used for this purpose. 
[NFPA 54:5.2.2.1 — 5.2.2.2] 
1208.3 Sizing of Gas Piping Systems. Gas piping sys- 
tems shall be of such size and so installed as to provide a sup- 
ply of gas sufficient to meet the maximum demand and supply 
gas to each appliance inlet at not less than the minimum sup- 
ply pressure required by the appliance. [NFPA 54:5.3.1] 


1208.3.1 Maximum Gas Demand. The volumetric 
flow rate of gas to be provided shall be the sum of the 
maximum input of the appliances served. The volumet- 
ric flow rate of gas to be provided shall be adjusted for 
altitude where the installation is above 2000 feet (610 
m). [NFPA 54:5.3.2.1 — 5.3.2.2] Where the input rating 
is not indicated, the gas supplier, appliance manufacturer, 
or a qualified agency shall be contacted, or the rating 
from Table 1208.3.1 shall be used for estimating the vol- 
umetric flow rate of gas to be supplied. 


The total connected hourly load shall be used as the 
basis for piping sizing, assuming all appliances are oper- 
ating at full capacity simultaneously. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


« 


« 


« 


» 


» 


» 


Exception: Sizing shall be permitted to be based upon 
established load diversity factors. [NFPA 54:5.3.2.3] 


TABLE 1208.3.1 
APPROXIMATE GAS INPUT FOR 
TYPICAL APPLIANCES 
[NFPA 54: TABLE A.5.3.2.1] 


APPLIANCE Верона 

Space Heating Units 
Warm air furnace 

Single family 100 000 

Multifamily, per unit 60 000 
Hydronic boiler 

Single family 100 000 

Multifamily, per unit 60 000 
Space and Water Heating Units 
Hydronic boiler 

Single-family 120 000 

Multifamily, per unit 75 000 
Water Heating Appliances 
Water heater, automatic storage 

30 to 40 gallon tank 35 000 
Water heater, automatic storage 

50 gallon tank 50 000 
Water heater, automatic instantaneous 

Capacity at 2 gallons per minute 142 800 

Capacity at 4 gallons per minute 285 000 

Capacity at 6 gallons per minute 428 400 
Water heater, domestic, circulating or 
side-arm 35 000 
Cooking Appliances 
Range, freestanding, domestic 65 000 
Built-in oven or broiler unit, domestic 25 000 
Built-in top unit, domestic 40 000 
Other Appliances 
Refrigerator 3000 
Clothes dryer, Type 1 (domestic) 35 000 
Gas fireplace direct-vent 40 000 
Gas log 80 000 
Barbecue 40 000 
Gaslight 2500 


For SI units: 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW 


1208.3.2 Sizing Methods. Gas piping shall be sized in 

accordance with one of the following: 

(1) Pipe sizing tables or sizing equations in this chap- 
ter. 


(2) Sizing tables included in a listed piping system man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions. 


(3) Engineering methods. [NFPA 54:5.3.3] 


1208.3.3 Allowable Pressure Drop. The design pres- 
sure loss in a piping system from the point of delivery to 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


the inlet connection of all appliances served shall be such 
that the supply pressure at each appliance inlet is greater 
than or equal to the minimum pressure required by the 
appliance. [NFPA 54:5.3.4] 


1208.4 Maximum Operating Pressure in Buildings. < 
The maximum operating pressure for any piping systems 
located inside buildings shall not exceed 5 psi (34 kPa) unless 
one or more of the following conditions are met: 


(1) 
Q) 


G) 
(4) 


(5) 


(6) 
(7) 
(8) 


The piping joints are welded or brazed. 

The piping is joined by fittings listed to ANSI LC 4/CSA 
6.32 and installed according to the manufacturer’s instal- 
lation instructions. 


The piping joints are flanged and all pipe-to-flange con- | 
nections are made by welding or brazing. 

The piping is located in a ventilated chase or otherwise | 
enclosed for protection against accidental gas accumula- 
tion. 

The piping is located inside buildings or separate areas of | 
buildings used exclusively for one of the following: 

(a) Industrial processing or heating 

(b) Research 

(c) Warehousing 

(d) Boiler or mechanical rooms 

The piping is a temporary installation for buildings under | 
construction. 

The piping serves appliances or equipment used for agri- | 
cultural purposes. 

The piping system is an LP-Gas piping system with an | 
operating pressure greater than 20 psi (138 kPa) and 
complies with NFPA 58. [NFPA 54:5.4.4] 

1208.4.1 LP-Gas Systems Operating Below -5°F [< 
(-21°C). LP-Gas systems designed to operate below - 
5°F (-21°C) or with butane or a propane-butane mix shall 
be designed to either accommodate liquid LP-Gas or to 


prevent LP-Gas vapor from condensing back into a liq- 
uid. [NFPA 54:5.4.5] 


1208.5 Acceptable Piping Materials and Joining < 


Methods. Materials used for piping systems shall comply 
with the requirements of Section 1208.5.1 through Section 
1208.5.6.3. {NFPA 54:5.5.1.1} 


1208.5.1 Used Materials. Pipe, fittings, valves, or << 
other materials shall not be used again unless they are 
free of foreign materials and have been ascertained to be 
adequate for the service intended. [NFPA 54:5.5.1.2] 
1208.5.2 Metallic Pipe. Metallic pipe shall be in | 
accordance with the Section 1208.5.2.1 through Section 
1208.5.2.4. 

1208.5.2.1 Cast Iron. Cast-iron pipe shall not be | 

used. [NFPA 54:5.5.2.1] 

1208.5.2.2 Steel, Stainless Steel, and Wrought- << 

Iron Pipe. Steel, stainless steel, and wrought-iron 

pipe shall be at least Schedule 40 and shall comply 


217 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


218 


with the dimensional standards of ASME B36.10M 
and one of the following: 


(1) ASTM A53 
(2) ASTM A106 
(3) ASTM A312 {NFPA 54:5.5.2.2} 


1208.5.2.3 Copper and Copper Alloy Pipe. 
Copper and copper alloy pipe shall not be used if the 
gas contains more than an average of 0.3 grains of 
hydrogen sulfide per 100 standard cubic feet (scf) of 
gas (0.7 mg/100 L). 


Threaded copper, copper alloy, or aluminum 
alloy pipe shall not be used with gases corrosive to 
such material. [NFPA 54:5.5.2.3 — 5.5.2.4] 


1208.5.2.4 Aluminum Alloy Pipe. Aluminum 
alloy pipe shall comply with ASTM B241 (except 
that the use of alloy 5456 is prohibited), and shall be 
marked at each end of each length indicating com- 
pliance. Aluminum alloy pipe shall be coated to pro- 
tect against external corrosion where it is in contact 
with masonry, plaster, or insulation or is subject to 
repeated wettings by such liquids as water, deter- 
gents, or sewage. [NFPA 54:5.5.2.5] 


Aluminum alloy pipe shall not be used in exte- 
rior locations or underground. [NFPA 54:5.5.2.6] 


1208.5.3 Metallic Tubing. Tubing shall not be used 
with gases corrosive to the tubing material. [NFPA 
54:5.5.3.1] 


1208.5.3.1 Steel Tubing. Steel tubing shall com- 
ply with ASTM A254. [NFPA 54:5.5.3.2] 


1208.5.3.2 Stainless Steel. Stainless steel tub- 
ing shall comply with one of the following: 


(1) ASTM A268 
(2) ASTM A269 [NFPA 54:5.5.3.3] 


1208.5.3.3 Copper and Copper Alloy Tubing. 
Copper and copper alloy tubing shall not be used if 
the gas contains more than an average of 0.3 grains 
of hydrogen sulfide per 100 scf of gas (0.7 mg/100 
L). Copper tubing shall comply with standard Type 
K or Type L of ASTM B88 or ASTM B280. [NFPA 
54:5.5.3.4] 


1208.5.3.4 Aluminum Alloy Tubing. Aluminum 
alloy tubing shall comply with ASTM B210 or 
ASTM B241. Aluminum alloy tubing shall be 
coated to protect against external corrosion where it 
is in contact with masonry, plaster, or insulation or 
is subject to repeated wettings by such liquids as 
water, detergent, or sewage. Aluminum alloy tubing 
shall not be used in exterior locations or under- 
ground. [NFPA 54:5.5.3.5] 

1208.5.3.5 Corrugated Stainless Steel Tub- 
ing. Corrugated stainless steel tubing shall be listed 
in accordance with CSA/ANSI LC 1/CSA 6.26. 
[NFPA 54:5.5.3.6] 


1208.5.4 Plastic Pipe, Tubing, and Fittings. Polyeth- < 
ylene plastic pipe, tubing, and fittings used to supply fuel 
gas shall conform to ASTM D2513. Pipe to be used shall 

be marked “gas” and “ASTM D2513.” Polyamide pipe, 
tubing, and fittings shall be identified in and conform to 
ASTM F2945. Pipe to be used shall be marked “gas” and 
“ASTM F2945.” Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) and chlorinated 
polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) plastic pipe, tubing, and fittings 
shall not be used to supply fuel gas. [NFPA 54:5.5.4.1.1 — 
5.5.4.1.3] 


1208.5.5 Regulator Vent Piping. Plastic pipe and fit- < 
tings used to connect regulator vents to remote vent ter- 
minations shall be PVC (Schedule 40 and 80). PVC vent | 
piping shall not be installed indoors. {NFPA 54:5.5.4.2} 


1208.5.6 Anodeless Risers. Anodeless risers shall € 
comply with Section 1208.5.6.1 through Section 
1208.5.6.3. 


1208.5.6.1 Factory-Assembled Anodeless << 
Risers. Factory-assembled anodeless risers shall be 
recommended by the manufacturer for the gas used 
and shall be leak tested by the manufacturer in 
accordance with written procedures. [NFPA 
54:5.5.4.3(1)] 


1208.5.6.2 Service Head Adapters and Field- << 
Assembled Anodeless Risers. Service head 
adapters and field-assembled anodeless risers incor- 
porating service head adapters shall be recommended 

by the manufacturer for the gas used and shall be 
design-certified to meet the requirements of Category 

I of ASTM D2513 and 49 CFR 192.281(e). The man- 
ufacturer shall provide the user qualified installation 
instructions as prescribed by 49 CFR 192.283(b). 
[NFPA 54:5.5.4.3(2)] 


1208.5.6.3 Undiluted Liquefied Petroleum << 
Gas Piping. The use of plastic pipe, tubing, and 
fittings in undiluted LP-Gas piping systems shall be 
in accordance with NFPA 58. [NFPA 54:5.5.4.3(3)] 


1208.5.7 Workmanship and Defects. Gas pipe, tub- 4 
ing, and fittings shall be clear and free from cutting burrs 
and defects in structure or threading and shall be thor- | 
oughly brushed and chip and scale blown. Defects in 
pipe, tubing, and fittings shall not be repaired. Defective 
pipe, tubing, and fittings shall be replaced. [NFPA 
54:5.5.5] 
1208.5.8 Metallic Pipe Threads. Metallic pipe and fit- << 
ting threads shall be taper pipe threads and shall comply 
with ASME B1.20.1. [NFPA 54:5.5.6.1] 
1208.5.8.1 Damaged Threads. Pipe with threads << 
that are stripped, chipped, corroded, or otherwise 
damaged shall not be used. Where a weld opens dur- 
ing the operation of cutting or threading, that por- 
tion of the pipe shall not be used. [NFPA 54:5.5.6.2] 
1208.5.8.2 Number of Threads. Field threading << 
of metallic pipe shall be in accordance with Table 
1208.5.8.2. [NFPA 54:5.5.6.3] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


TABLE 1208.5.8.2 
SPECIFICATIONS FOR THREADING METALLIC PIPE 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 5.5.6.3] 


APPROXIMATE 
ააა. n 
(inches) (inches) THREADS TO BE CUT 

% 54 10 
Ya 54 10 
1 % 10 
1% 1 11 
1% 1 11 
2 1 11 
2% 1% 12 
3 1^ 12 
4 1% 13 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


1208.5.8.3 Thread Joint Sealing. Threaded joints 
shall be made using a thread joint sealing material. 


[NFPA 54:5.5.6.4.1] 


Thread joint sealing materials shall be compat- 
ible with the pipe and fitting material on which the 


compounds are used. [NFPA 54:5.5.6.4.2] 


Thread joint sealing materials shall be resistant 
to the chemical constituents of the gases to be con- 


ducted through the piping. {NFPA 54:5.5.6.4.3} 


1208.5.9 Metallic Piping Joints and Fittings. The 
type of piping joint used shall be suitable for the pres- 
sure and temperature conditions and shall be selected 
giving consideration to joint tightness and mechanical 
strength under the service conditions. The joint shall be 
able to sustain the maximum end force due to the inter- 
nal pressure and any additional forces due to tempera- 
ture expansion or contraction, vibration, fatigue, or the 


weight of the pipe and its contents. [NFPA 54:5.5.7] 


1208.5.9.1 Pipe Joints. Schedule 40 and heavier 
pipe joints shall be threaded, flanged, brazed, 
welded, or assembled with press-connect fittings 


listed to ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32. 


(1) Where nonferrous pipe is brazed, the brazing 
materials shall have a melting point in excess 


of 1000°F (538°C). 


(2) Brazing alloys shall not contain more than 0.05 


percent phosphorus. {NFPA 54:5.5.7.1} 


1208.5.9.2 Copper Tubing Joints. Copper tub- 
ing joints shall be assembled with approved gas tub- 
ing fittings, shall be brazed with a material having a 
melting point in excess of 1000°F (538°C), or shall 
be assembled with press-connect fittings listed to 
ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32. Brazing alloys shall not con- 
tain more than 0.05 percent phosphorus. [NFPA 


54:5.5.7] 


1208.5.9.3 Stainless Steel Tubing Joints. Stain- 
less steel joints shall be welded, assembled with 
approved tubing fittings, brazed with a material hav- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


ing a melting point in excess of 1000?F (538?C), or 
assembled with press-connect fittings listed to ANSI 
LC 4/CSA 6.32. Brazing alloys and fluxes shall be 
recommended by the manufacturer for use on stain- 
less steel alloys. [NFPA 54:5.5.7.3] 


1208.5.9.4 Flared Joints. Flared joints shall be 
used only in systems constructed from nonferrous 
pipe and tubing where experience or tests have 
demonstrated that the joint is suitable for the condi- 
tions and where provisions are made in the design to 
prevent separation of the joints. [NFPA 54:5.5.7.4] 
1208.5.9.5 Metallic Pipe Fittings. Metallic fit- 
tings shall comply with the following: 

(1) Threaded fittings in sizes larger than 4 inches 

(100 mm) shall not be used. 


Fittings used with steel, stainless steel, or 
wrought-iron pipe shall be steel, stainless steel, 
copper alloy, malleable iron, or cast iron. 


(2 


МУ 


(3 


— 


Fittings used with copper or copper alloy pipe 
shall be copper or copper alloy. 


(4 


— 


Fittings used with aluminum alloy pipe shall be 
aluminum alloy. 


(5 


МУ 


Cast-iron fittings shall comply with the follow- 
ing: 

(a) Flanges shall be permitted. 

(b) Bushings shall not be used. 


(c) Fittings shall not be used in systems con- 
taining flammable gas-air mixtures. 


(d) Fittings in sizes 4 inches (100 mm) and 
larger shall not be used indoors unless 
approved by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


(e) Fittings in sizes 6 inches (150 mm) and 
larger shall not be used unless approved by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


(6) Aluminum alloy fitting threads shall not form 
the joint seal. 


(7) Zinc-aluminum alloy fittings shall not be used 
in systems containing flammable gas-air mix- 
tures. 

(8) Special fittings such as couplings, proprietary- 
type joints, saddle tees, gland-type compression 
fittings, and flared, flareless, or compression- 
type tubing fittings shall be as follows: 

(a) Used within the fitting manufacturer’s 
pressure-temperature recommendations. 

(b) Used within the service conditions antici- 
pated with respect to vibration, fatigue, 
thermal expansion, or contraction. 

(c) Acceptable to the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 

(9) When pipe fittings are drilled and tapped in the 
field, the operation shall be in accordance with 
the following: 


219 


« 


« 


»l 


» 


» 


» 


» 
» 


» 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


220 


(a) The operation shall be performed on sys- 
tems having operating pressures of 5 psi 
(34 kPa) or less. 


(b) The operation shall be performed by the 
gas supplier or their designated representa- 
tive. 


(c) The drilling and tapping operation shall be 
performed in accordance with written pro- 
cedures prepared by the gas supplier. 


(d) The fittings shall be located outdoors. 


(e) The tapped fitting assembly shall be 
inspected and proven to be free of leaks. 
[NFPA 54:5.5.7.5] 


1208.5.10 Plastic Piping Joints and Fittings. Plas- 
tic pipe, tubing, and fittings shall be joined in accordance 
with the manufacturers' instructions. Section 1208.5.10.1 
through Section 1208.5.10.4 shall be observed when 
making such joints. [NFPA 54:5.5.8] 


1208.5.10.1 Joint Design. The joint shall be 
designed and installed so that the longitudinal pull- 
out resistance of the joint will be at least equal to the 
tensile strength of the plastic piping material. [NFPA 
54:5.5.8(1)] 


1208.5.10.2 Heat-Fusion Joint. Heat-fusion 
joints shall be made in accordance with qualified 
procedures that have been established and proven by 
test to produce gastight Joints at least as strong as 
the pipe or tubing being joined. Joints shall be made 
with the joining method recommended by the pipe 
manufacturer. Polyethylene heat-fusion fittings shall 
be marked “ASTM D2513." Polyamide heat-fusion 
fittings shall be marked “ASTM F2945.” [NFPA 
54:5.5.8(2)] 


1208.5.10.3 Compression-Type Mechanical 
Joints. Where compression-type mechanical joints 
are used, the gasket material in the fitting shall be com- 
patible with the plastic piping and with the gas dis- 
tributed by the system. An internal tubular rigid 
stiffener shall be used in conjunction with the fitting. 
The stiffener shall be flush with the end of the pipe or 
tubing and shall extend at least to the outside end of the 
compression fitting when installed. The stiffener shall 
be free of rough or sharp edges and shall not be a force 
fit in the plastic. Split tubular stiffeners shall not be 
used. [NFPA 54:5.5.8(3)] 
1208.5.10.4 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Piping 
Systems. Plastic piping joints and fittings for use 
in LP-Gas piping systems shall be in accordance 
with NFPA 58. [NFPA 54:5.5.8(4)] 

1208.5.11 Flange Specification. Flanges shall com- 

ply with Section 1208.5.11.1 through Section 1208.5.11.7. 
1208.5.11.1 Cast Iron Flanges. Cast iron flanges 
shall be in accordance with ASME B16.1. [NFPA 
54:5.5.9.1.1] 
1208.5.11.2 Steel Flanges. Steel flanges shall be 
in accordance with the following: 


(1) ASME 816.5 or 
(2) ASME ВІ6.47. [NFPA 54:5.5.9.1.2] 


1208.5.11.3 Non-Ferrous Flanges. Non-ferrous << 
flanges shall be in accordance with ASME B16.24. 
[NFPA 54:5.5.9.1.3] 


1208.5.11.4 Ductile Iron Flanges. Ductile iron «« 
flanges shall be in accordance with ASME B16.42. 
[NFPA 54:5.5.9.1.4] 


1208.5.11.5 Dissimilar Flange Connections. << 
Raised-face flanges shall not be joined to flat-faced 
cast iron, ductile iron or nonferrous material flanges. 
[NFPA 54:5.5.9.2] 

1208.5.11.6 Flange Facings. Standard facings « 
shall be permitted for use under this code. Where 
150 psi (1034 kPa) steel flanges are bolted to Class 
125 cast-iron flanges, the raised face on the steel 
flange shall be removed. [NFPA 54:5.5.9.3] 
1208.5.11.7 Lapped Flanges. Lapped flanges << 
shall be used only aboveground or in exposed loca- 
tions accessible for inspection. [NFPA 54:5.5.9.4] 


1208.5.12 Flange Gaskets. The material for gaskets «4 


shall be capable of withstanding the design temperature 
and pressure of the piping system and the chemical con- 
stituents of the gas being conducted without change to 
its chemical and physical properties. The effects of fire 
exposure to the joint shall be considered in choosing the 
material. [NFPA 54:5.5.10] 


1208.5.12.1 Flange Gasket Materials. Accept- «< 


able materials shall include the following: 
(1) Metal (plain or corrugated) 

(2) Composition 

(3) Aluminum “O” rings 

(4) Spiral-wound metal gaskets 

(5) Rubber-faced phenolic 

(6) Elastomeric [NFPA 54:5.5.10.1] 


1208.5.12.2 Metallic Flange Gaskets. Metallic «4 


flange gaskets shall be in accordance with ASME 
B16.20. [NFPA 54:5.5.10.2.1] 


1208.5.12.3 Non-Metallic Flange Gaskets. «4 


Non-metallic flange gaskets shall be in accordance 
with ASME B16.21. [NFPA 54:5.5.10.2.2] 


1208.5.12.4 Full-Face Flange Gasket. Full-face <« 


flange gaskets shall be used with all non-steel 
flanges. [NFPA 54:5.5.10.3] 


1208.5.12.5 Separated Flanges. When a < 


flanged joint is separated, the gasket shall be 
replaced. [NFPA 54:5.5.10.4] 


1208.6 Gas Meters. Gas meters shall be selected for the << 
maximum expected pressure and permissible pressure drop. 
[NFPA 54:5.6.1] 


1208.6.1 Location. Gas meters shall be located in ven- < 


tilated spaces readily accessible for examination, reading, 
replacement, or necessary maintenance. [NFPA 54:5.6.2.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


»| 1208.6.1.1 Protection from Damage. Gas 
meters shall not be placed where they will be sub- 
jected to damage, such as adjacent to a driveway, 
under a fire escape, in public passages, halls, or 
where they will be subject to excessive corrosion or 
vibration. [NFPA 54:5.6.2.2] 


» 1208.6.1.2 Extreme Temperatures. Gas meters 
shall not be located where they will be subjected to 
extreme temperatures or sudden extreme changes in 
temperature or in areas where they are subjected to 
temperatures beyond those recommended by the 
manufacturer. [NFPA 54:5.6.2.3] 


» 1208.6.2 Supports. Gas meters shall be supported or 
connected to rigid piping so as not to exert a strain on the 
meters. Where flexible connectors are used to connect a 
gas meter to downstream piping at mobile homes in 
mobile home parks, the meter shall be supported by a 
post or bracket placed in a firm footing or by other means 
providing equivalent support. [NFPA 54:5.6.3] 


» 1208.6.3 Meter Protection. Meters shall be protected 
against overpressure, backpressure, and vacuum. [NFPA 
54:5.6.4] 


» 1208.6.4 Identification. Gas piping at multiple meter 
installations shall be marked by a metal tag or other per- 
manent means designating the building or the part of the 
building being supplied and attached by the installing 
agency. [NFPA 54:5.6.5] 


)) 1208.7 Gas Pressure Regulators. A line pressure regu- 
lator shall be installed where the gas supply pressure exceeds 
the maximum allowable inlet pressure of the appliance 
served. [NFPA 54:5.7.1] 


» 1208.71 Listing. Line pressure regulators shall be 
I listed in accordance with CSA/ANSI Z21.80/CSA 6.22 
where the outlet pressure is set to 2 psi (14 kPa) or less. 

[NFPA 54:5.7.2] 


» 1208.72 Location. The gas pressure regulator shall be 
accessible for servicing. [NFPA 54:5.7.3] 


» 1208.73 Regulator Protection. Pressure regulators 
shall be protected against physical damage. [NFPA 
54:5.7.4] 


» 1208.7.4 Regulator Vents. Regulator vents shall be in 
accordance with Section 1208.15. [NFPA 54:5.7.5] 

» 1208.75 Identification. Line pressure regulators at 
multiple regulator installations shall be marked by a 
metal tag or other permanent means designating the 
building or the part of the building being supplied. 
[NFPA 54:5.7.6] 


>) 1208.8 Overpressure Protection Required. Where the 
serving gas supplier delivers gas at a pressure greater than 2 
psi (14 kPa) for piping systems serving appliances designed 
to operate at a gas pressure of 14 inches water column (3.5 
kPa) or less, overpressure protection devices shall be 
installed. Piping systems serving equipment designed to oper- 
ate at inlet pressures greater than 14 inches water column (3.5 
kPa) shall be equipped with overpressure protection devices 
as required by the appliance manufacturer's installation 
instructions. [NFPA 54:5.8.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1208.9 Overpressure Protection Devices. Overpres- 
sure protection devices shall be one of the following: 


(1) 
Q) 
G) 


(4) 


Pressure relief valve. 
Monitor regulator. 


Series regulator installed upstream from the line regula- 
tor and set to continuously limit the pressure on the inlet 
of the line regulator to the maximum values specified by 
Section 1208.10 or less. 


Automatic shutoff device installed in series with the line 
pressure regulator and set to shut off when the pressure 
on the downstream piping system reaches the maximum 
values specified by Section 1208.10 or less. This device 
shall be designed so that it will remain closed until man- 
ually reset. [NFPA 54:5.8.3.1] 


1208.9.1 Separate Devices. The devices in Section 
1208.9 shall be installed either as an integral part of the 
service or line pressure regulator or as separate units. 
Where separate overpressure protection devices are 
installed, they shall comply with Section 1208.9.2 
through Section 1208.9.7. [NFPA 54:5.8.3.2] 


1208.9.2 Construction and Installation. All over- 
pressure protection devices shall meet the following 
requirements: 


(1) Be constructed of materials so that the operation of 
the device 1s not impaired by corrosion of external 
parts by the atmosphere or of internal parts by the gas. 


(2) Be designed and installed so they can be operated to 
determine whether the valve is free. The devices 
shall also be designed and installed so they can be 
tested to determine the pressure at which they oper- 
ate and be examined for leakage when in the closed 
position. [NFPA 54:5.8.4] 


1208.9.3 External Control Piping. External control 
piping shall be designed and installed so that damage to 
the control piping of one device does not render both the 
regulator and the overpressure protective device inoper- 
ative. [NFPA 54:5.8.5] 


1208.9.4 Setting. Each pressure limiting or pressure 
relieving device shall be set so that the gas pressure sup- 
plied to the connected appliance(s) does not exceed the lim- 
its specified in Section 1208.10 and Section 1208.10.1. 
[NFPA 54:5.8.6] 


1208.9.5 Unauthorized Operation. Where unautho- 
rized operation of any shutoff valve could render a pres- 
sure relieving valve or pressure limiting device 
inoperative, one of the following shall be accomplished: 


(1) The valve shall be locked in the open position. 
Instruct authorized personnel in the importance of 
leaving the shutoff valve open and of being present 
while the shutoff valve is closed so that it can be 
locked in the open position before leaving the prem- 
ises. 


(2) Duplicate relief valves shall be installed, each hav- 
ing adequate capacity to protect the system, and 
arrange the isolating valves or three-way valve so 
that only one relief valve can be rendered inopera- 
tive at a time. [NFPA 54:5.8.7] 


221 


« 


« 


« 


« 


« 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1208.9.6 Discharge of Vents. The discharge stacks, 
vents, or outlet parts of all pressure relieving and pressure 
limiting devices shall be located so that gas is safely dis- 
charged to the outdoors. Discharge stacks or vents shall 
be designed to prevent the entry of water, insects, or other 
foreign material that could cause blockage. 


The discharge stack or vent line shall be at least the 
same size as the outlet of the pressure relieving device. 
[NFPA 54:5.8.8.1 — 5.8.8.2] 


1208.9.7 Size of Fittings, Pipe, and Openings. 
The fittings, pipe, and openings located between the sys- 
tem to be protected and the pressure relieving device 
shall be sized to prevent hammering of the valve and to 
prevent impairment of relief capacity. [NFPA 54:5.8.9] 


1208.10 Pressure Limitation Requirements. Where pip- 
ing systems serving appliances designed to operate with a gas 
supply pressure of 14 inches water column (3.5 kPa) or less are 
required to be equipped with overpressure protection by Sec- 
tion 1208.8, each overpressure protection device shall be 
adjusted to limit the gas pressure to each connected appliance 
to 2 psi (14 kPa) or less upon a failure of the line pressure reg- 
ulator. [NFPA 54:5.8.2.1] 


1208.10.1 Overpressure Protection Required. 
Where piping systems serving appliances designed to oper- 
ate with a gas supply pressure greater than 14 inches water 
column (3.5 kPa) are required to be equipped with over- 
pressure protection by Section 1208.8, each overpressure 
protection device shall be adjusted to limit the gas pressure 
to each connected appliance as required by the appliance 
manufacturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:5.8.2.2] 


1208.10.2 Overpressure Protection Devices. Each 
overpressure protection device installed to meet the 
requirements of this section shall be capable of limiting 
the pressure to its connected appliance(s) as required by 
this section independently of any other pressure control 
equipment in the piping system. [NFPA 54:5.8.2.3] 
1208.10.3 Detection of Failure. Each gas piping sys- 
tem for which an overpressure protection device is 
required by this section shall be designed and installed so 
that a failure of the primary pressure control device(s) is 
detectable. [NFPA 54:5.8.2.4] 


1208.10.4 Flow Capacity. If a pressure relief valve is 
used to meet the requirements of this section, it shall 
have a flow capacity such that the pressure in the pro- 
tected system is maintained at or below the limits speci- 
fied in Section 1208.10 under the following conditions: 


(1) The line pressure regulator for which the relief valve 
is providing overpressure protection has failed wide 
open. 

(2) The gas pressure at the inlet ofthe line pressure reg- 

ulator for which the relief valve is providing over- 

pressure protection 1s not less than the regulator's 
normal operating inlet pressure. [NFPA 54:5.8.2.5] 

1208.11 Backpressure Protection. Protective devices 

shall be installed as close to the equipment as practical where 

the design of equipment connected is such that air, oxygen, or 
standby gases could be forced into the gas supply system. 


222 


Gas and air combustion mixers incorporating double 
diaphragm “zero” or “atmosphere” governors or regulators 
shall require no further protection unless connected directly to 
compressed air or oxygen at pressures of 5 psi (34 kPa) or 
more. [NFPA 54:5.9.1.1 — 5.9.1.2] 


1208.11.1 Protective Devices. Protective devices 
shall include but not be limited to the following: 


(1) 
(2) 


Check valves. 


Three-way valves (of the type that completely closes 
one side before starting to open the other side). 

(3) Reverse flow indicators controlling positive shutoff 
valves. 

(4) Normally closed air-actuated positive shutoff pres- 
sure regulators. [NFPA 54:5.9.2] 


1208.12 Low-Pressure Protection. A protective device 
shall be installed between the meter and the appliance or 
equipment if the operation of the appliance or equipment is 
such that it could produce a vacuum or a dangerous reduction 
in gas pressure at the meter. Such protective devices include, 
but are not limited to, mechanical, diaphragm-operated, or 
electrically operated low-pressure shutoff valves. [NFPA 
54:5.10] 


1208.13 Shutoff Valves. Shutoff valves shall be selected in 
accordance with Table 1208.13. Shutoff valves of size 1 inch 
(25 mm) National Pipe Thread and smaller shall be listed and 
labeled. Where used outdoors, such use shall be in accordance 
with the manufacturer’s recommendation. [NFPA 54:5.11] 


1208.14 Expansion and Flexibility. Piping systems shall 
be designed to prevent failure from thermal expansion or con- 
traction. [NFPA 54:5.13.1] 


1208.14.1 Special Local Conditions. Where local 
conditions include earthquake, tornado, unstable ground, 
or flood hazards, special consideration shall be given to 
increased strength and flexibility of piping supports and 
connections. [NFPA 54:5.13.2] 


1208.15 Pressure Regulator and Pressure Control 
Venting. The venting of the atmospheric side of diaphragms 
in line pressure regulators, gas appliance regulators, and gas 
pressure limit controls shall be in accordance with all of the 
following: 


(1) An independent vent pipe to the outdoors, sized in accor- 
dance with the device manufacturer’s instructions, shall 
be provided where the location of a device is such that a 
discharge of fuel gas will cause a hazard. For devices 
other than appliance regulators, vents are not required to 
be independent where the vents are connected to a com- 
mon manifold designed in accordance with engineering 
methods to minimize backpressure in the event of 
diaphragm failure and such design is approved. 


Exceptions: 


(1) A regulator and vent limiting means combination 
listed as complying with CSA/ANSI Z21.80/CSA 
6.22, shall not be required to be vented to the out- 
doors. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


« 


« 


« 


« 


« 


Q) 
G) 


(4) 


(5) 
(6) 


(7) 


(2) A listed gas appliance regulator factory equipped 
with a vent limiting device is not required to be 
vented to the outdoors. 


Materials for vent piping shall be in accordance with Sec- 
tion 1208.5 through Section 1208.5.12.5. 


The vent terminus shall be designed to prevent the entry 
of water, insects, and other foreign matter that could 
cause blockage. 


Vent piping shall be installed to minimize static loads 
and bending moments placed on the regulators and gas 
pressure control devices. 


Vents shall terminate not less than 3 feet (914 mm) from 
a possible source of ignition. 


At locations where a vent termination could be sub- 
merged during floods or snow accumulations, an anti- 
flood-type breather vent fitting shall be installed, or the 
vent terminal shall be located above the height of the 
expected flood waters or snow. 


Vent piping from pressure regulators and gas pressure 
controls shall not be connected to a common manifold 
that serves a bleed line from a diaphragm-type gas valve. 
[NFPA 54:5.14] 


TABLE 1208.13 
MANUAL GAS VALVE STANDARDS 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 5.11] 


SHUTOFF VALVE 


APPLICATION STANDARDS 


Appliance shutoff valve up |ASME B16.44 
to % psi 


CSA/ANSI Z21.15/CSA 9.1 


ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 
ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 


Valve up to % psi 


ASME B16.44 
ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 
ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 


Valve up to 2 psi 


ASME B16.44 labeled 2G 
ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 
ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 with 


ASME B16.44 labeled 2G 
or labeled 5G 


ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 with 
ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 


Valve up to 5 psi 


ASME B16.44 labeled 5G 
ASME B16.33 


ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 with 
ASME B16.44 marked 5G 
ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 with 
ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 


Valve up to 125 psi 


ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 


ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32 with 
ASME B16.33 marked 125 G 


For SI Units: 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1209.0 Excess Flow Valve. 


1209.1 General. Where automatic excess flow valves are 
installed, they shall be listed in accordance with ANSI 
Z21.93/CSA 6.30 and shall be sized and installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturers’ instructions. [NFPA 54:5.12] 


1210.0 Gas Piping Installation. 


1210.1 Piping Underground. Underground gas piping 
shall be installed with sufficient clearance from any other 
underground structure to avoid contact therewith, to allow 
maintenance, and to protect against damage from proximity 
to other structures. Underground plastic piping shall be | 
installed with sufficient clearance or shall be insulated from 
any source of heat so as to prevent the heat from impairing the 
serviceability of the pipe. [NFPA 54:7.1.1.1 — 7.1.1.2] 


1210.1.1 Cover Requirements. Underground piping 
systems shall be installed with a minimum of 12 inches 
(305 mm) of cover. The minimum cover shall be 
increased to 18 inches (457 mm) if external damage to 
the pipe or tubing from external forces is likely to result. 
Where a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm) of cover can- 
not be provided, the piping shall be installed in conduit. | 
[NFPA 54:7.1.2.1 — 7.1.2.1(B)] 


1210.1.2 Trenches. The trench shall be graded so that 
the pipe has a firm, substantially continuous bearing on 
the bottom of the trench. [NFPA 54:7.1.2.2] 


1210.1.2.1 Backfilling. Where flooding of the 
trench is done to consolidate the backfill, care shall 
be exercised to see that the pipe is not floated from 
its firm bearing on the trench bottom. [NFPA 
54:7.1.2.3] 


1210.1.3 Protection Against Corrosion. Steel pipe 
and steel tubing installed underground shall be installed 
in accordance with Section 1210.1.3.1 through Section 
1210.1.3.9. [NFPA 54:7.1.3] 


1210.1.3.1 Zinc Coating. Zinc coating (galvaniz- 
ing) shall not be deemed adequate protection for 
underground gas piping. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.1] 


1210.1.3.2 Underground Piping. Underground 
piping shall comply with one or more of the follow- 
ing unless approved technical justification is pro- 
vided to demonstrate that protection 1s unnecessary: 


(1) The piping shall be made of corrosion-resistant 
material that is suitable for the environment in 
which it will be installed. 


Pipe shall have a factory-applied, electrically 
insulating coating. Fittings and joints between 
sections of coated pipe shall be coated in accor- 
dance with the coating manufacturer's instruc- 
tions. 


(2 


МУ 


(3 


— 


The piping shall have a cathodic protection sys- 
tem installed, and the system shall be main- 
tained in accordance with Section 1210.1.3.3 or 
Section 1210.1.3.6. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.2] 


223 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1210.1.3.3 Cathodic Protection. Cathodic pro- 1210.1.4 Protection Against Freezing. Where the 

tection systems shall be monitored by testing and the formation of hydrates or ice is known to occur, piping 

results shall be documented. The test results shall shall be protected against freezing. [NFPA 54:7.1.4] 
demonstrate one of the following: 1210.1.5 Piping through Foundation Wall. Piping 

(1) A pipe-to-soil voltage of —0.85 volts or more through a foundation wall shall comply with all of the 
negative is produced, with reference to a satu- following: 
rated copper-copper sulfate half cell. (1) Underground piping, where installed through the | 

(2) A pipe-to-soil voltage of —0.78 volts or more outer foundation or basement wall of a building, 
negative is produced, with reference to a satu- shall be encased in a protective sleeve or protected 
rated KCI calomel half cell. by an approved device or method. 

(3) A pipe-to-soil voltage of —0.80 volts or more (2) The spaces between the gas piping and the sleeve | 
negative is produced, with reference to a silver- and between the sleeve and the wall shall be sealed 
silver chloride half cell. to prevent entry of gas and water. 

(4) Compliance with a method described in Appen- (3) Sealing materials shall be compatible with the pip- 
dix D of Title 49 of the code of Federal Regu- ing and sleeve. [NFPA 54:7.1.5] 
lations, Part 192. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.3] 1210.1.6 Piping Underground Beneath Buildings. 

1210.1.3.4 Sacrificial Anodes. Sacrificial anodes Where gas piping is installed underground beneath build- 

shall be tested in accordance with the following: ings, the piping shall be either of the following: 

(1) Upon installation of the cathodic protection sys- (1) Encased in an approved conduit designed to with- 
tem, except where prohibited by climatic con- stand the imposed loads and installed in accordance 
ditions, in which case the testing shall be with Section 1210.1.6.1 or Section 1210.1.6.2. 
performed not later than 180 days after the (2) A piping/encasement system listed for installation 
installation of the system. beneath buildings. [NFPA 54:7.1.6] 

(2) 12 to 18 months after the initial test. 1210.1.6.1 Conduit with One End Terminat- 

(3) Upon successful verification testing in accor- ing Outdoors. The conduit shall extend into an 
dance with Section 1210.1.3.4(1) and Section accessible portion of the building and, at the point 
1210.1.3.4(2), periodic follow-up testing shall where the conduit terminates in the building, the 
be performed at intervals not to exceed 36 space between the conduit and the gas piping shall 
months. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.4] be sealed to prevent the possible entrance of any gas 


leakage. Where the end sealing is of a type that 
retains the full pressure ofthe pipe, the conduit shall 
be designed for the same pressure as the pipe. The 
conduit shall extend at least 4 inches (102 mm) out- 


1210.1.3.5 System Failing Tests. Systems fail- 
ing a test shall be repaired not more than 180 days 
after the date of the failed testing. The testing sched- 


ule shall be restarted as required in Section side the building, be vented outdoors above finished 
1210.1.3.4(1) and Section 1210.1.3.4(2), and the ground level, and be installed so as to prevent the 
results shall comply with Section 1210.1.3.3. [NFPA entrance of water and insects. [NFPA 54:7.1.6.1] 

em . 1210.1.6.2 Conduit with Both Ends Terminat- 
1210.1.3.6 Impressed Current Cathodic Pro- ing Indoors. Where the conduit originates and ter- 
tection. Impressed current cathodic protection sys- minates within the same building, the conduit shall 
tems shall be inspected and tested in accordance originate and terminate in an accessible portion of 


with the following schedule: the building and shall not be sealed. [NFPA 
(1) The impressed current rectifier voltage output 54:7.1.6.2] 

shall be checked at intervals not exceeding two 1210.1.7 Connections of Plastic Piping. Plastic | 

months. piping shall be installed outdoors, underground only. 
(2) The pipe-to-soil voltage shall be tested at least Exceptions: 

annually. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.6] (1) Plastic piping shall be permitted to terminate above- 
1210.1.3.7 Documentation. Documentation of ground where an anodeless riser is used. 
the results of the Io most recent tests shall be (2) Plastic piping shall be permitted to terminate with a 
retained. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.7] wall head adapter aboveground in buildings, includ- 
1210.1.3.8 Dissimilar Metals. Where dissimilar ing basements, where the plastic piping is inserted in 
metals are joined underground, an insulating cou- a piping material permitted for use in buildings. 
pling or fitting shall be used. [NFPA 54:7.1.3.8] [NFPA 54:7.1.7.1] 
1210.1.3.9 Steel Risers. Steel risers, other than 1210.1.71 Connections Between Metallic and 
anodeless risers, connected to plastic piping shall be Plastic Piping. Connections made between metal- 
cathodically protected by means of a welded anode. lic and plastic piping shall be made with fittings con- 
[NFPA 54:7.1.3.9] forming to one of the following: 


224 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) ASTM D2513, Category I transition fittings 

(2) ASTM F1973 

(3) ASTM F2509 [NFPA 54:7.1.7.2] 

1210.1.7.2 Tracer Wire. An electrically continuous 

corrosion-resistant tracer shall be buried with the 

plastic pipe to facilitate locating. The tracer shall be 

one of the following: 

(1) A product specifically designed for that pur- 
pose. 

(2) Insulated copper conductor not less than 14 
A 


Where tracer wire is used, access shall be pro- 
vided from aboveground, or one end of the tracer 
wire or tape shall be brought aboveground at a build- 
ing wall or riser. [NFPA 54:7.1.7.3 — 7.1.7.3.2] 


1210.2 CSST Piping Systems. CSST piping systems shall 

be installed in accordance with this code and the manufac- 

turer’s installation instructions. [NFPA 54:7.1.8] 

1210.3 Installation of Aboveground Piping. Piping 
| installed aboveground shall comply with all of the following: 


| (0 
I(2) 


I (3) 


I 4) 


(5) 
(6) 


Piping shall be securely supported and located where it 
will be protected from physical damage. 


Where passing through an exterior wall, the piping shall 
also be protected from corrosion by coating or wrapping 
with an inert material approved for such applications. 


The piping shall be sealed around its circumference at 
the point of the exterior penetration to prevent the entry 
of water, insects, and rodents. 


Where piping 1s encased in a protective pipe sleeve, the 
annular spaces between the gas piping and the sleeve and 
between the sleeve and the wall opening shall be sealed. 


Piping installed outdoors shall be elevated not less than 
3% inches (89 mm) above the ground. 


Sealing materials shall be compatible with the piping and 
sleeve. [NFPA 54:7.2.1] 


1210.3.1 Protective Coating. Where piping is in con- 
tact with a material or an atmosphere corrosive to the pip- 
ing system, the piping and fittings shall be coated with a 
corrosion-resistant material. Any such coating used on 
piping or components shall not be considered as adding 
strength to the system. [NFPA 54:7.2.2] 


1210.3.2 Building Structure. The installation of gas 
piping shall not cause structural stresses within building 
components to exceed allowable design limits. Approval 


shall be obtained before any beams or joists are cut or 
notched. [NFPA 54:7.2.3.1 — 7.2.3.2] 


1210.3.3 Gas Piping to be Sloped. Piping for other 
than dry gas conditions shall be sloped not less than 1⁄4 
inch in 15 feet (6.4 mm in 4.6 m) to prevent traps. [NFPA 
54:7.2.4] 


1210.3.3.1 Ceiling Locations. Gas piping shall 
be permitted to be installed in accessible spaces 
between a fixed ceiling and a dropped ceiling, 
whether or not such spaces are used as a plenum. 
Valves shall not be located in such spaces. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


Exception: Appliance or equipment shutoff valves 
required by this code shall be permitted to be installed 
in accessible spaces containing vented appliances. 


1210.3.4 Prohibited Locations. Gas piping inside 
any building shall not be installed in or through a clothes 
chute, chimney or gas vent, dumbwaiter, elevator shaft, 
or air duct, other than combustion air ducts. [NFPA 
54:7.2.5] 


Exception: Ducts used to provide ventilation air in 
accordance with Section 506.0 or to above-ceiling spaces 
in accordance with Section 1210.3.3.1. 


1210.3.5 Hangers, Supports, and Anchors. Piping 
shall be supported with metal pipe hooks, metal pipe straps, 
metal bands, metal brackets, metal hangers, or building 
structural components, suitable for the size of piping, of 
adequate strength and quality, and located at intervals so 
as to prevent or damp out excessive vibration. Piping shall 
be anchored to prevent undue strains on connected appli- 
ances and equipment and shall not be supported by other 
piping. Pipe hangers and supports shall conform to the 
requirements of MSS SP-58. [NFPA 54:7.2.6.1] 


1210.3.5.1 Spacing. Spacing of supports in gas 
piping installations shall not be greater than shown 
in Table 1210.3.5.1. Spacing of supports of CSST 
shall be in accordance with the CSST manufac- 
turer’s instructions. [NFPA 54:7.2.6.2] 


TABLE 1210.3.5.1 
SUPPORT OF PIPING 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 7.2.6.2] 


STEEL PIPE, SPACING OF NOMINAL SIZE SPACING OF 
NOMINAL SIZE SUPPORTS OF TUBING SUPPORTS 
OF PIPE (feet) SMOOTH WALL (feet) 
(inches) (inches O.D.) 
№ 6 № 4 
% or | 8 Ув ог 6 
1% or larger Ж or 1 
: 10 Е 8 
(horizontal) (horizontal) 
1'Aor larger Every floor 1 or larger Every floor 
(vertical) level (vertical) level 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


1210.3.5.2 Expansion and Contraction. Sup- 
ports, hangers, and anchors shall be installed so as 
not to interfere with the free expansion and contrac- 
tion of the piping between anchors. All parts of the 
supporting system shall be designed and installed so 
they are not disengaged by movement of the sup- 
ported piping. [NFPA 54:7.2.6.3] 

1210.3.5.3 Piping on Roofs. Gas piping installed 
on the roof surfaces shall be supported in accordance 
with Table 1210.3.5.1. Gas piping shall be elevated 
not less than 3% inches (89 mm) above the roof sur- 
face. [NFPA 54:7.2.6.4.1, 7.2.6.4.2] 


1210.4 Concealed Piping in Buildings. Gas piping in 
concealed locations shall be installed in accordance with this 
section. [NFPA 54:7.3.1] 


225 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1210.4.1 Connections. Where gas piping is to be con- 
cealed, connections shall be of the following type: 


(1 


— 


Pipe fittings such as elbows, tees, couplings, and 
right/left nipple/couplings. 


(2) Joining tubing by brazing (see Section 1208.5.9.1). 
(3) Press-connect fittings listed to ANSI LC 4/CSA 6.32. 
(4) CSST fittings listed to CSA/ANSI LC 1/CSA 6.26. 


(5) Where necessary to insert fittings into a gas pipe sys- 
tem installed in a concealed location, the pipe shall 
be reconnected by welding, flanges, or the use of a 
right/left nipple/coupling. 


1210.4.2 Piping in Partitions. Concealed gas piping 
shall not be located in solid partitions. [NFPA 54:7.3.3] 


1210.4.3 Tubing in Partitions. This provision shall not 
apply to tubing that pierces walls, floors, or partitions. 
Tubing installed vertically and horizontally inside hollow 
walls or partitions without protection along its entire con- 
cealed length shall meet the following requirements: 


(1) A steel striker barrier not less than 0.0508 of an inch 
(1.3 mm) thick, or equivalent, is installed between 
the tubing and the finished wall and extends at least 
4 inches (102 mm) beyond concealed penetrations 
of plates, firestops, wall studs, and so on. 


(2) The tubing is installed in single runs and is not 
rigidly secured. [NFPA 54:7.3.4] 


1210.4.4 Industrial Occupancies. In industrial occu- 
pancies, gas piping in solid floors such as concrete shall 
be laid in channels in the floor and covered to permit 
access to the piping with a minimum of damage to the 
building. Where piping in floor channels could be 
exposed to excessive moisture or corrosive substances, 
the piping shall be protected in an approved manner. 
[NFPA 54:7.3.5.1] 


1210.4.5 Other Occupancies. In other than industrial 
occupancies and where approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, gas piping embedded in concrete floor 
slabs constructed with portland cement shall be sur- 
rounded with a minimum of 1% inches (38 mm) of con- 
crete and shall not be in physical contact with other 
metallic structures such as reinforcing rods or electrically 
neutral conductors. All piping, fittings, and risers shall be 
protected against corrosion in accordance with Section 
1210.3.1. Piping shall not be embedded in concrete slabs 
containing quickset additives or cinder aggregate. [NFPA 
54:7.3.5.2] 


1210.5 Piping in Vertical Chases. Where gas piping 
exceeding 5 psi (34 kPa) is located within vertical chases in 
accordance with Section 1208.4(4), the requirements of Sec- 
tion 1210.5.1 through Section 1210.5.3 shall apply. [NFPA 
54:7.4] 


226 


1210.5.1 Pressure Reduction. Where pressure reduc- 
tion is required in branch connections for compliance with 
Section 1208.4, such reduction shall take place either inside 
the chase or immediately adjacent to the outside wall of the 
chase. Regulator venting and downstream overpressure 
protection shall comply with Section 1208.7.4 and Section 
1208.8 through Section 1208.10.4. The regulator shall be 


accessible for service and repair and vented in accordance 
with one of the following: 


(1) Where the fuel gas is lighter than air, regulators 
equipped with a vent limiting means shall be permit- 
ted to be vented into the chase. Regulators not 
equipped with a vent limiting means shall be permit- 
ted to be vented either directly to the outdoors or to a 
point within the top 1 foot (305 mm) of the chase. 


(2) Where the fuel gas is heavier than air, the regulator 
vent shall be vented only directly to the outdoors. 
[NFPA 54:7.4.1] 


1210.5.2 Chase Construction. Chase construction 
shall comply with local building codes with respect to 
fire resistance and protection of horizontal and vertical 
openings. [NFPA 54:7.4.2] 


1210.5.3 Ventilation. A chase shall be ventilated to the 
outdoors and only at the top. The opening(s) shall have a 
minimum free area [in square inches (square meters)] 
equal to the product of one-half of the maximum pressure 
in the piping [in pounds per square inch (kilopascals)] 
times the largest nominal diameter of that piping [in inches 
(millimeters)], or the cross-sectional area of the chase, 
whichever is smaller. Where more than one fuel gas pip- 
ing system is present, the free area for each system shall be 
calculated and the largest area used. [NFPA 54:7.4.3] 


1210.6 Gas Pipe Turns. Changes in direction of gas pipe 
shall be made by the use of fittings, factory bends, or field 
bends. [NFPA 54:7.5] 


1210.6.1 Metallic Pipe. Metallic pipe bends shall com- 

ply with the following: 

(1) Bends shall be made only with bending tools and 
procedures intended for that purpose. 

(2) All bends shall be smooth and free from buckling, 
cracks, or other evidence of mechanical damage. 

(3) The longitudinal weld of the pipe shall be near the 
neutral axis of the bend. 

(4) Pipe shall not be bent through an arc of more than 90 
degrees. 

(5) The inside radius of a bend shall be not less than 6 
times the outside diameter of the pipe. [NFPA 
54:7.5.1] 

1210.6.2 Plastic Pipe. Plastic pipe bends shall comply 

with the following: 

(1) The pipe shall not be damaged, and the internal 
diameter of the pipe shall not be effectively reduced. 


(2) Joints shall not be located in pipe bends. 


(3) The radius of the inner curve of such bends shall not 
be less than 25 times the inside diameter of the pipe. 


(4) Where the piping manufacturer specifies the use of 
special bending tools or procedures, such tools or 
procedures shall be used. [NFPA 54:7.5.2] 


1210.6.3 Elbows. Factory-made welding elbows or 
transverse segments cut therefrom shall have an arc 
length measured along the crotch of at least 1 inch (25.4 
mm) for pipe sizes 2 inches (50 mm) and larger. [NFPA 
54:7.5.3] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1210.7 Drips and Sediment Traps. For other than dry gas 
conditions, a drip shall be provided at any point in the line of 
pipe where condensate could collect. Where required by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction or the serving gas supplier, a 
drip shall also be provided at the outlet of the meter. This drip 
shall be installed so as to constitute a trap wherein an accu- 
mulation of condensate shuts off the flow of gas before it runs 
back into the meter. [NFPA 54:7.6.1] 


1210.71 Location of Drips. АП drips shall be installed 
only in such locations that they are readily accessible to 
permit cleaning or emptying. A drip shall not be located 
where the condensate is likely to freeze. [NFPA 54:7.6.2] 


1210.72 Sediment Traps. The installation of sediment 
traps shall be in accordance with Section 1212.9. [NFPA 
54:7.6.3] 


1210.8 Outlets. Outlets shall be located and installed in 
accordance with the following requirements: 


(1) The outlet fittings or piping shall be securely fastened in 
place. 


(2) Outlets shall not be located behind doors. 


(3) Outlets shall be located far enough from floors, walls, 
patios, slabs, and ceilings to permit the use of wrenches 
without straining, bending, or damaging the piping. 

(4) The unthreaded portion of gas piping outlets shall extend 
not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) through finished ceilings 
or indoor or outdoor walls. 


(5) The unthreaded portion of gas piping outlets shall extend 
not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the surface of floors 
or outdoor patios or slabs. 


(6) The provisions of Section 1210.8(4) and Section 1210.8(5) 
shall not apply to listed quick-disconnect devices of the 
flush-mounted type or listed gas convenience outlets. Such 
devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:7.7.1.1 — 7.7.1.6] 


1210.8.1 Cap Outlets. Each outlet, including a valve, 
shall be closed gastight with a threaded plug or cap 
immediately after installation and shall be left closed 
until the appliance or equipment is connected thereto. 
When an appliance or equipment is disconnected from 
an outlet and the outlet is not to be used again immedi- 
ately, it shall be capped or plugged gastight. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Laboratory appliances installed in accordance with 
Section 1212.3.1 shall be permitted. 


(2) The use of a listed quick-disconnect device with 
integral shutoff or listed gas convenience outlet shall 
be permitted. [NFPA 54:7.7.2.1] 


1210.8.2 Appliance Shutoff Valves. Appliance shut- 
off valves installed in fireplaces shall be removed, and 
the piping capped gastight where the fireplace is used for 
solid fuel burning. [NFPA 54:7.7.2.2] 
1210.9 Manual Gas Shutoff Valves. An accessible gas 
shutoff valve shall be provided upstream of each gas pressure 
regulator. Where two gas pressure regulators are installed in 


series in a single gas line, a manual valve shall not be required 
at the second regulator. [NFPA 54:7.8.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1210.9.1 Accessibility of Gas Valves. System shut- 
off valves shall be readily accessible for operation and 
installed so as to be protected from physical damage. Sys- 
tem shutoff valves shall be marked with a metal tag or 
other permanent means attached by the installing agency 
so that the gas piping systems supplied through them can 
be readily identified. [NFPA 54:7.8.1.1 — 7.8.1.2] 


1210.9.2 Shutoff Valves for Multiple House Lines. 
In multiple-tenant buildings supplied through a master 
meter, through one service regulator where a meter is not 
provided, or where meters or service regulators are not 
readily accessible from the appliance or equipment loca- 
tion, an individual shutoff valve for each apartment or 
tenant line shall be provided at a convenient point of gen- 
eral accessibility. In a common system serving a number 
of individual buildings, shutoff valves shall be installed 
at each building. [NFPA 54:7.8.3.1] 


1210.9.3 Emergency Shutoff Valves. An exterior 
shutoff valve to permit turning off the gas supply to each 
building in an emergency shall be provided. The emer- 
gency shutoff valves shall be plainly marked as such and 
their locations posted as required by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. [NFPA 54:7.8.3.2] 


1210.9.4 Shutoff Valve for Laboratories. Each lab- 
oratory space containing two or more gas outlets installed 
on tables, benches, or in hoods in educational, research, 
commercial and industrial occupancies shall have a sin- 
gle shutoff valve through which all such gas outlets are 
supplied. The shutoff valve shall be accessible, located 
within the laboratory or adjacent to the laboratory's 
egress door, and identified. [NFPA 54:7.8.3.3] 


1210.9.5 System Shutoff Valves. Where a system 
shutoff valve is installed, the valve shall comply with 
Section 1208.13. [NFPA 54:7.8.4] 


1210.10 Prohibited Devices. Devices shall not be placed 
within the interior of gas piping or fittings where such devices 
reduce the cross-sectional area or otherwise obstruct the free 
flow of gas, except where allowance in the piping system 
design has been made for such devices. [NFPA 54:7.9] 


1210.11 Systems Containing Gas-Air Mixtures Out- 
side the Flammable Range. Where gas-air mixing 
machines are employed to produce mixtures above or below 
the flammable range, they shall be provided with stops to pre- 
vent adjustment of the mixture to within or approaching the 
flammable range. [NFPA 54:7.10] 

1210.12 Systems Containing Flammable Gas-Air 
Mixtures. Systems containing flammable gas-air mixtures 
shall be in accordance with Section 1210.12.1 through Sec- 
tion 1210.12.6. 

1210.12.1 Required Components. A central premix 

system with a flammable mixture in the blower or com- 

pressor shall consist of the following components: 

(1) Gas-mixing machine in the form of an automatic 
gas-air proportioning device combined with a down- 
stream blower or compressor. 

(2) Flammable mixture piping, minimum Schedule 40. 


(3) Automatic firecheck(s). 


227 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


228 


(4) Safety blowout(s) or backfire preventers for systems 
utilizing flammable mixture lines above 2 inches 
(65 mm) nominal pipe size (NPS) or the equivalent. 
[NFPA 54:7.11.1] 


1210.12.2 Optional Components. The following 
components shall also be permitted to be utilized in any 
type of central premix system: 


(1) Flowmeter(s) 
(2) Flame arrester(s) [NFPA 54:7.11.2] 


1210.12.3 Additional Requirements. Gas-mixing 
machines shall have nonsparking blowers and shall be 
constructed so that a flashback does not rupture machine 
casings. [NFPA 54:7.11.3] 


1210.12.4 Special Requirements for Mixing Blow- 
ers. A mixing blower system shall be limited to applica- 
tions with minimum practical lengths of mixture piping, 
limited to a maximum mixture pressure of 10 inches water 
column (2.5 kPa) and limited to gases containing no more 
than 10 percent hydrogen. The blower shall be equipped 
with a gas control valve at its air entrance arranged so that 
gas is admitted to the airstream, entering the blower in 
proper proportions for correct combustion by the type of 
burners employed, the said gas control valve being of either 
the zero governor or mechanical ratio valve type that con- 
trols the gas and air adjustment simultaneously. No valves 
or other obstructions shall be installed between the blower 
discharge and the burner or burners. [NFPA 54:7.11.4] 


1210.12.5 Installation of Gas-Mixing Machines. 
Installation of gas-mixing machines shall comply with 
Section 1210.12.5.1 through Section 1210.12.5.5. 


1210.12.5.1 Location. The gas-mixing machine 
shall be located in a well-ventilated area or in a 
detached building or cutoff room provided with 
room construction and explosion vents in accor- 
dance with engineering methods. Such rooms or 
below-grade installations shall have adequate posi- 
tive ventilation. [NFPA 54:7.11.5.1] 


1210.12.5.2 Electrical Requirements. Where gas- 
mixing machines are installed in well-ventilated areas, 
the type of electrical equipment shall be in accordance 
with California Electrical Code for general service 
conditions unless other hazards in the area prevail. 
Where gas-mixing machines are installed in small 
detached buildings or cutoff rooms, the electrical 
equipment and wiring shall be installed in accordance 
with California Electrical Code for hazardous loca- 
tions (Articles 500 and 501, Class I, Division 2). 
[NFPA 54:7.11.5.2] 


1210.12.5.3 Air Intakes. Air intakes for gas-mix- 
ing machines using compressors or blowers shall be 
taken from outdoors whenever practical. [NFPA 
54:7.11.5.3] 


1210.12.5.4 Controls. Controls for gas-mixing 
machines shall include interlocks and a safety shut- 
off valve of the manual reset type in the gas supply 
connection to each machine arranged to automatically 
shut off the gas supply in the event of high or low gas 


pressure. Except for open burner installations only, 
the controls shall be interlocked so that the blower or 
compressor stops operating following a gas supply 
failure. Where a system employs pressurized air, 
means shall be provided to shut off the gas supply in 
the event of air failure. [NFPA 54:7.11.5.4] 


1210.12.5.5 Installation in Parallel. Centrifugal | 
gas-mixing machines in parallel shall be reviewed 
by the user and equipment manufacturer before 
installation, and means or plans for minimizing the 
effects of downstream pulsation and equipment 
overload shall be prepared and utilized as needed. 
[NFPA 54:7.11.5.5] 


1210.12.6 Use of Automatic Firechecks, Safety 
Blowouts, or Backfire Preventers. Automatic 
firechecks and safety blowouts or backfire preventers 
shall be provided in piping systems distributing flamma- 
ble air-gas mixtures from gas-mixing machines to protect 
the piping and the machines in the event of flashback, in 
accordance with the following: 


(1) Approved automatic firechecks shall be installed 
upstream as close as practical to the burner inlets fol- 
lowing the firecheck manufacturers’ instructions. | 


(2) А separate manually operated gas valve shall be pro- 
vided at each automatic firecheck for shutting off 
the flow of the gas-air mixture through the firecheck 
after a flashback has occurred. The valve shall be 
located upstream as close as practical to the inlet of 
the automatic firecheck. 


Caution: These valves shall not be reopened after a 
flashback has occurred until the firecheck has cooled 
sufficiently to prevent re-ignition of the flammable 
mixture and has been reset properly. 


(3) A safety blowout or backfiring preventer shall be 
provided in the mixture line near the outlet of each 
gas-mixing machine where the size of the piping is 
larger than 24 inches (65 mm) NPS, or equivalent, to 
protect the mixing equipment in the event of an 
explosion passing through an automatic firecheck. 
The manufacturers’ instructions shall be followed | 
when installing these devices, particularly after a disc 
has burst. The discharge from the safety blowout or 
backfire preventer shall be located or shielded so that 
particles from the ruptured disc cannot be directed 
toward personnel. Wherever there are interconnected 
installations of gas-mixing machines with safety 
blowouts or backfire preventers, provision shall be 
made to keep the mixture from other machines from 
reaching any ruptured disc opening. Check valves 
shall not be used for this purpose. 


(4) Large-capacity premix systems provided with explo- 
sion heads (rupture discs) to relieve excessive pres- 
sure in pipelines shall be located at and vented to a 
safe outdoor location. Provisions shall be provided 
for automatically shutting off the supply of the gas-air 
mixture in the event of rupture. [NFPA 54:7.11.6] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1211.0 Electrical Bonding and Grounding. 


1211.1 Pipe and Tubing Other than CSST. Each above- 
ground portion of a gas piping system, other than CSST, that 
is likely to become energized shall be electrically continuous 
and bonded to an effective ground-fault current path. Gas pip- 
ing, other than CSST, shall be considered to be bonded when 
it is connected to appliances that are connected to the appli- 
ance grounding conductor of the circuit supplying that appli- 
ance. [NFPA 54:7.12.1] 
1211.2 Bonding of CSST Gas Piping. CSST gas piping 
systems, and gas piping systems containing one or more seg- 
ments of CSST, shall be electrically continuous and bonded 
to the electrical service grounding electrode system or, where 
provided, lightning protection grounding electrode system. 
[NFPA 54:7.12.2] 

1211.2.1 Bonding Jumper Connection. The bond- 

ing jumper shall connect to a metallic pipe, pipe fitting, 

or CSST fitting. [NFPA 54:7.12.2.1] 

1211.2.2 Bonding Jumper Size. The bonding jumper 

shall not be smaller than 6 AWG copper wire or equiva- 

lent. [NFPA 54:7.12.2.2] 


1211.2.3 Bonding Jumper Length. The length of the 
jumper between the connection to the gas piping system 
and the grounding electrode system shall not exceed 75 
feet (22 860 mm). Any additional grounding electrodes 
installed to meet this requirement shall be bonded to the 
electrical service grounding electrode system or, where 
provided, lightning protection grounding electrode sys- 
tem. [NFPA 54:7.12.2.3] 
1211.2.4 Bonding Connections. Bonding connections 
[| shall be in accordance with California Electrical Code. 
[NFPA 54:7.12.2.4] 
1211.2.5 Devices Used for Bonding. Devices used 
for the bonding connection shall be listed for the appli- 
cation in accordance with UL 467. [NFPA 54:7.12.2.5] 
1211.3 Arc-Resistant Jacketed CSST. CSST listed with 
an arc resistant jacket or coating system in accordance with 
| CSA/ANSI LC 1/CSA 6.26 shall be electrically continuous and 
bonded to an effective ground fault current path. Where any 
CSST component of a piping system does not have an arc- 
resistant Jacket or coating system, the bonding requirements of 
Section 1211.2 shall apply. Arc-resistant jacketed CSST shall 
be considered to be bonded when it is connected to appliances 
that are connected to the appliance grounding conductor of the 
circuit supplying that appliance. [NFPA 54:7.12.3] 
1211.4 Prohibited Use. Gas piping shall not be used as a 
grounding conductor or electrode. [NFPA 54:7.12.4.1] 
1211.5 Lightning Protection System. Where a lightning 
protection system is installed, the bonding of the gas piping 
shall be in accordance with NFPA 780. [NFPA 54:7.12.5] 
1211.6 Electrical Circuits. Electrical circuits shall not uti- 
lize gas piping or components as conductors. 
Exception: Low-voltage (50 V or less) control circuits, igni- 
tion circuits, and electronic flame detection device circuits 
shall be permitted to make use of piping or components as a 
part of an electric circuit. [NFPA 54:7.13] 
1211.7 Electrical Connections. All electrical connections 
between wiring and electrically operated control devices in a 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


piping system shall conform to the requirements of Califor- 
nia Electrical Code. [NFPA 54:7.14.1] 
1211.71 Safety Control. Any essential safety control 
depending on electric current as the operating medium 
shall be of a type that shuts off (fail safe) the flow of gas 
in the event of current failure. [NFPA 54:7.14.2] 
1211.8 Earthquake-Actuated Gas Shutoff Valves. 
Earthquake-actuated gas shutoff valves designed to auto- 
matically shut off the gas at the location of the valve in the 
event of a seismic disturbance and certified by the State 
Architect as conforming to California Code of Regulations, 
Title 24, Part 12, Chapter 12-16-1, shall be provided for 
buildings when such installation is required by local ordi- 
nance. Earthquake-actuated gas shutoff valves which have 
not been certified by the State Architect shall be prohibited 
in buildings open to the public under mandatory installation 
by local ordinance. Installation of the valves shall be in 
accordance with local ordinance, and in the absence of such 
per the manufacturer 5 installation instructions. 


1212.0 Appliance and Equipment Connections to 

Building Piping. 

1212.1 Connecting Appliances and Equipment. 

Appliances and equipment shall be connected to the building 

piping in compliance with Section 1212.6 through Section 

1212.8 by one of the following: 

(1) Rigid metallic pipe and fittings. 

(2) Semirigid metallic tubing and metallic fittings. Aluminum 
alloy tubing shall not be used in exterior locations. 

(3) A connector for gas appliances listed in accordance with 
ANSI Z21.24/CSA 6.10. The connector shall be used in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instruc- 
tions and shall be in the same room as the appliance. 
Only one connector shall be used per appliance. 


(4) A connector for outdoor gas appliances and manufactured 
homes listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.75/CSA 6.27. 
Only one connector shall be used per appliance. 


(5) CSST where installed in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. CSST shall not be 
directly routed into a metallic appliance enclosure where 
the appliance is connected to a metallic vent that termi- 
nates above a roofline. CSST shall connect only to appli- 
ances that are fixed in place. 

(6) Listed nonmetallic gas hose connectors in accordance 
with Section 1212.3. 


(7) Unlisted gas hose connectors for use in laboratories and 

educational facilities in accordance with Section 1212.4. 
[NFPA 54:9.6.1] 
1212.1.1 Protection of Connectors. Connectors and 
tubing addressed in Section 1212.1(2), Section 
1212.1(3), Section 1212.1(4), Section 1212.1(5), and 
Section 1212.1(6) shall be installed to be protected 
against physical and thermal damage. Aluminum alloy 
tubing and connectors shall be coated to protect against 
external corrosion where they are in contact with 
masonry, plaster, or insulation or are subject to repeated 
wettings by such liquids as detergents, sewage, or water 
other than rainwater. [NFPA 54:9.6.1.1] 


229 


» 


» 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


Materials addressed in Section 1212.1(2), Section 
1212.1(3), Section 1212.1(4), Section 1212.1(5), and 
Section 1212.1(6) shall not be installed through an open- 
ing in an appliance housing, cabinet, or casing, unless 
the tubing or connector is protected against damage. 
[NFPA 54:9.6.1.2] 


1212.1.2 Food Service Appliance Connectors. 
Connectors used with food service appliances that are 
moved for cleaning and sanitation purposes shall be 
installed in accordance with the connector manufac- 
turer's installation instructions. Such connectors shall be 
listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.69/CSA 6.16. 
[NFPA 54:9.6.1.3] 


1212.1.3 Restraining Device. Movement of appliances 
with casters shall be limited by a restraining device 
installed in accordance with the connector and appliance 
manufacturer's installation instructions. [NFPA 54:9.6.1.4] 


1212.2 Suspended Low-Intensity Infrared Tube 
Heaters. Suspended low-intensity infrared tube heaters shall 
be connected to the building piping system with a connector 
listed for the application in accordance with ANSI 
Z21.24/CSA 6.10 as follows: 


(1) The connector shall be installed in accordance with the 
tube heater installation instructions and shall be in the 
same room as the appliance. 


(2) Only one connector shall be used per appliance. [NFPA 
54:9.6.1.5] 


1212.3 Use of Nonmetallic Gas Hose Connectors. 
Listed gas hose connectors shall be used in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions and in accordance 
with Section 1212.3.1 and Section 1212.3.2. [NFPA 54:9.6.2] 


1212.3.1 Indoor. Indoor gas hose connectors shall be 
used only to connect laboratory, shop, and ironing appli- 
ances requiring mobility during operation and installed in 
accordance with the following: 


(1) An appliance shutoff valve shall be installed where 
the connector is attached to the building piping. 


(2) The connector shall be of minimum length and shall 
not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm). 


(3) The connector shall not be concealed and shall not 
extend from one room to another or pass through 
wall partitions, ceilings, or floors. [NFPA 
54:9.6.2(1)] 


1212.3.2 Outdoor. Where outdoor gas hose connectors 
are used to connect portable outdoor appliances, the con- 
nector shall be listed in accordance with CSA/ANSI 
Z21.54/CSA 8.4 and installed in accordance with the fol- 
lowing: 

(1) An appliance shutoff valve, a listed quick-discon- 
nect device, or a listed gas convenience outlet shall 
be installed where the connector is attached to the 
supply piping and in such a manner so as to prevent 
the accumulation of water or foreign matter. 


(2 


МУ 


This connection shall be made only in the outdoor area 
where the appliance is to be used. [NFPA 54:9.6.2(2)] 


The connector length shall not exceed 15 feet (4572 
mm). 


(3 


— 


230 


1212.4 Injection (Bunsen) Burners. Injection (Bunsen) 
burners used in laboratories and educational facilities shall 
be permitted to be connected to the gas supply by an unlisted 
hose. [NFPA 54:9.6.3] 


1212.5 Connection of Portable and Mobile Industrial 
Gas Appliances. Where portable industrial appliances or 
appliances requiring mobility or subject to vibration are con- 
nected to the building gas piping system by the use of a flex- 
ible hose, the hose shall be suitable and safe for the conditions 
under which it can be used. [NFPA 54:9.6.4.1] 


1212.5.1 Swivel Joints or Couplings. Where indus- 
trial appliances requiring mobility are connected to the 
rigid piping by the use of swivel joints or couplings, the 
swivel joints or couplings shall be suitable for the serv- 
ice required, and only the minimum number required 
shall be installed. [NFPA 54:9.6.4.2] 


1212.5.2 Metal Flexible Connectors. Where indus- 
trial appliances subject to vibration are connected to the 
building piping system by the use of all metal flexible 
connectors, the connectors shall be suitable for the serv- 
ice required. [NFPA 54:9.6.4.3] 


1212.5.3 Flexible Connectors. Where flexible con- 
nections are used, they shall be of the minimum practical 
length and shall not extend from one room to another or 
pass through any walls, partitions, ceilings, or floors. 
Flexible connections shall not be used in any concealed 
location. They shall be protected against physical or ther- 
mal damage and shall be provided with gas shutoff valves 
in readily accessible locations in rigid piping upstream 
from the flexible connections. [NFPA 54:9.6.4.4] 
1212.6 Appliance Shutoff Valves and Connections. 
Each appliance connected to a piping system shall have an 
accessible, approved manual shutoff valve with a nondis- 
placeable valve member, or a listed gas convenience outlet. 
Appliance shutoff valves and convenience outlets shall serve 
a single appliance only. [NFPA 54:9.6.5] The shutoff valve 
shall be located within 6 feet (1829 mm) of the appliance it 
serves. [NFPA 54:9.6.5.1] Where a connector is used, the 
valve shall be installed upstream of the connector. A union 
or flanged connection shall be provided downstream from the 
valve to permit removal of appliance controls. [NFPA 
54:9.6.5.1(A)] 


Exceptions: 


(1) Shutoff valves serving decorative appliances in a fire- 
place shall not be located within the fireplace firebox 
except where the valve is listed for such use. [NFPA 
54:9.6.5.1(B)] 


Shutoff valves shall be permitted to be accessibly located 
inside wall heaters and wall furnaces listed for recessed 
installation where necessary maintenance is performed 
without removal of the shutoff valve. 


1212.7 Quick-Disconnect Devices. Quick-disconnect 
devices used to connect appliances to the building piping shall 
be listed in accordance with ANSI Z21.41/CSA 6.9. Where | 
installed indoors, an approved manual shutoff valve with a 
nondisplaceable valve member shall be installed upstream of] 
the quick-disconnect device. [NFPA 54:9.6.6.1 — 9.6.6.2] 


(2 


— 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1212.8 Gas Convenience Outlets. Appliances shall be 
permitted to be connected to the building piping by means of 
a listed gas convenience outlet, in conjunction with a listed 
appliance connector, installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions. 


Gas convenience outlets shall be listed in accordance 

| with CSA/ANSI Z21.90/CSA 6.24 and installed in accor- 

dance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 
[NFPA 54:9.6.7] 


1212.9 Sediment Trap. Where a sediment trap is not incor- 
porated as a part of the appliance, a sediment trap shall be 
installed downstream of the appliance shutoff valve as close 
to the inlet of the appliance as practical at the time of appli- 
ance installation. The sediment trap shall be either a tee fitting 
with a capped nipple in the bottom outlet, as illustrated in Fig- 
ure 1212.9, or another device recognized as an effective sed- 
iment trap. Illuminating appliances, gas ranges, clothes 
dryers, decorative appliances for installation in vented fire- 
places, gas fireplaces, and outdoor cooking appliances shall 
not be required to be so equipped. [NFPA 54:9.6.8] 


Gas supply inlet 


To 
equipment-«— 
inlet 


Tee fitting 


Cap 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


FIGURE 1212.9 
METHOD OF INSTALLING A TEE FITTING SEDIMENT TRAP 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE 9.6.8] 


1212.10 Installation of Piping. Piping shall be installed in 
a manner not to interfere with inspection, maintenance, or 
servicing of the appliances. [NFPA 54:9.6.9] 

1212.11 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Facilities and Pip- 


ing. Liquefied petroleum gas facilities shall be in accordance 
with NFPA 58. 


1213.0 Pressure Testing, Inspection, and Purging. 
1213.1 Piping Installations. Prior to acceptance and ini- 
tial operation, all piping installations shall be visually 
inspected and pressure tested to determine that the materials, 
design, fabrication, and installation practices comply with the 
requirements of this code. [NFPA 54:8.1.1.1] 


1213.1.1 Inspection Requirements. Inspection shall 
consist of visual examination, during or after manufac- 
ture, fabrication, assembly, or pressure tests. [NFPA 
54:8.1.1.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1213.1.2 Repairs and Additions. Where repairs or 
additions are made following the pressure test, the 
affected piping shall be tested. Minor repairs and addi- 
tions are not required to be pressure tested, provided that 
the work is inspected and connections are tested with a 
noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or other leak-detecting 
methods approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
[NFPA 54:8.1.1.3] 


1213.1.3 New Branches. Where new branches are 
installed to new appliance(s), only the newly installed 
branch(es) shall be required to be pressure tested. Con- 
nections between the new piping and the existing piping 
shall be tested with a noncorrosive leak-detecting fluid or 
approved leak-detecting methods. [NFPA 54:8.1.1.4] 


1213.1.4 Piping System. A piping system shall be 
tested as a complete unit or in sections. Under no cir- 
cumstances shall a valve in a line be used as a bulkhead 
between gas in one section of the piping system and test 
medium in an adjacent section, unless a double block and 
bleed valve system is installed. A valve shall not be sub- 
jected to the test pressure unless it can be determined that 
the valve, including the valve closing mechanism, is 
designed to safely withstand the pressure. [NFPA 
54:8.1.1.5] 


1213.1.5 Regulators and Valves. Regulator and 
valve assemblies fabricated independently of the piping 
system in which they are to be installed shall be permit- 
ted to be tested with inert gas or air at the time of fabri- 
cation. [NFPA 54:8.1.1.6] 


1213.1.6 Test Medium. The test medium shall be air, 
nitrogen, carbon dioxide, or an inert gas. Oxygen shall 
not be used as a test medium. [NFPA 54:8.1.2] 


1213.2 Test Preparation. Test preparation shall comply 
with Section 1213.2.1 through Section 1213.2.6. 


1213.2.1 Pipe Joints. Pipe joints, including welds, 
shall be left exposed for examination during the test. 


Exception: Covered or concealed pipe end joints that 
have been previously tested in accordance with this code. 
[NFPA 54:8.1.3.1] 


1213.2.2 Expansion Joints. Expansion joints shall 
be provided with temporary restraints, 1f required, for the 
additional thrust load under test. [NFPA 54:8.1.3.2] 


1213.2.3 Appliances and Equipment. Appliances 
and equipment that are not to be included in the test shall 
be either disconnected from the piping or isolated by 
blanks, blind flanges, or caps. Flanged joints at which 
blinds are inserted to blank off other equipment during the 
test shall not be required to be tested. [NFPA 54:8.1.3.3] 


1213.2.4 Designed for Operating Pressures Less 
Than Test Pressure. Where the piping system is con- 
nected to appliances or equipment designed for operating 
pressures of less than the test pressure, such appliances 
or equipment shall be isolated from the piping system by 
disconnecting them and capping the outlet(s). [NFPA 
54:8.1.3.4] 


1213.2.5 Designed for Operating Pressures Equal 
to or Greater Than Test Pressure. Where the piping 
system is connected to appliances or equipment designed 


231 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


for operating pressures equal to or greater than the test 
pressure, such appliances or equipment shall be isolated 
from the piping system by closing the individual appli- 
ance or equipment shutoff valve(s). [NFPA 54:8.1.3.5] 
1213.2.6 Safety. All testing of piping systems shall be 
performed in a manner that protects the safety of employ- 
ees and the public during the test. [NFPA 54:8.1.3.6] 


1213.3 Test Pressure. This inspection shall include an air, 
CO,, or nitrogen pressure test, at which time the gas piping 
shall stand a pressure of not less than 10 psi (69 kPa) gauge 
pressure. Test pressures shall be held for a length of time sat- 
Isfactory to the Authority Having Jurisdiction but in no case 
less than 15 minutes with no perceptible drop in pressure. For 
welded piping, and for piping carrying gas at pressures in 
excess of 14 inches water column pressure (3.5 kPa), the test 
pressure shall be not less than 60 psi (414 kPa) and shall be 
continued for a length of time satisfactory to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction, but in no case for less than 30 minutes. 
For CSST carrying gas at pressures in excess of 14 inches 
water column (3.5 kPa) pressure, the test pressure shall be not 
less than 30 psi (207 kPa) for 30 minutes. These tests shall be 
made using air, СО», or nitrogen pressure and shall be made 
in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Neces- 
sary apparatus for conducting tests shall be furnished by the 
permit holder. Test gauges used in conducting tests shall be 
in accordance with Section 318.0. 


1213.4 Detection of Leaks and Defects. The piping sys- 
tem shall withstand the test pressure specified without show- 
ing any evidence of leakage or other defects. Any reduction 
of test pressures as indicated by pressure gauges shall be 
deemed to indicate the presence of a leak unless such reduc- 
tion can be readily attributed to some other cause. [NFPA 
54:8.1.5.1] 


1213.4.1 Detecting Leaks. The leakage shall be 
located by means of an approved gas detector, a noncor- 
rosive leak detection fluid, or other approved leak detec- 
tion methods. [NFPA 54:8.1.5.2] 


1213.4.2 Repair or Replace. Where leakage or other 
defects are located, the affected portion of the piping sys- 
tem shall be repaired or replaced and retested. [NFPA 
54:8.1.5.3] 


1213.5 Piping System Leak Test. Leak checks using fuel 
gas shall be permitted in piping systems that have been pres- 
sure-tested in accordance with Section 1213.0 through Sec- 
tion 1213.4.2. [NFPA 54:8.2.1] 


1213.5.1 Turning Gas On. During the process of turn- 
ing gas on into a system of new gas piping, the entire sys- 
tem shall be inspected to determine that there are no open 
fittings or ends and that all valves at unused outlets are 
closed and plugged or capped. [NFPA 54:8.2.2] 


1213.5.2 Leak Check. Immediately after the gas is 
turned on into a new system or into a system that has 
been initially restored after an interruption of service, the 
piping system shall be checked for leakage. Where leak- 


232 


age is indicated, the gas supply shall be shut off until the 
necessary repairs have been made. [NFPA 54:8.2.3] 


1213.5.3 Placing Appliances and Equipment in 
Operation. Appliances and equipment shall not be 
placed in operation until after the piping system has been 
checked for leakage in accordance with Section 1213.5.2, 
the piping system is purged in accordance with Section 
1213.6, and connections to the appliance are checked for 
leakage. [NFPA 54:8.2.4] 

1213.6 Purging Requirements. The purging of piping 

shall be in accordance with Section 1213.6.1 through Section 

1213.6.3. [NFPA 54:8.3] 


1213.6.1 Piping Systems Required to be Purged 
Outdoors. The purging of piping systems shall be in 
accordance with Section 1213.6.1.1 through Section 
1213.6.1.5 where the piping system meets either of the 
following: 


(1) The design operating gas pressure is greater than 2 
psig (14 kPa). 
(2) The piping being purged contains one or more sec- 


tions of pipe or tubing meeting the size and length 
criteria of Table 1213.6.1. [NFPA 54:8.3.1] 


TABLE 1213.6.1 
SIZE AND LENGTH OF PIPING 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 8.3.1]* 


NOMINAL PIPING SIZE LENGTH OF PIPING 
(inches) (feet) 
225«3 > 50 
>3<4 > 30 
>4<6 >15 
26«8 > 10 
>8 Any length 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 
* CSST EHD size of 62 is equivalent to nominal 2 inches (50 mm) pipe or 
tubing size. 


1213.6.1.1 Removal from Service. Where exist- 
ing gas piping is opened, the section that 1s opened 
shall be 1solated from the gas supply and the line 
pressure vented in accordance with Section 
1213.6.1.4. Where gas piping meeting the criteria of 
Table 1213.6.1 is removed from service, the residual 
fuel gas in the piping shall be displaced with an inert 
gas. [NFPA 54:8.3.1.1] 

1213.6.1.2 Removal of Piping. Where piping 
containing gas is to be removed, the line shall be 
first disconnected from sources of gas and then thor- 
oughly purged with air, water, or inert gas before 
cutting, or welding is done. 

1213.6.1.3 Placing in Operation. Where gas pip- 
ing containing air and meeting the criteria of Table 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1213.6.1 is placed in operation, the air in the piping 
shall first be displaced with an inert gas. The inert 
gas shall then be displaced with fuel gas in accor- 
dance with Section 1213.6.1.4. [NFPA 54:8.3.1.2] 


1213.6.1.4 Outdoor Discharge of Purged 
Gases. The open end of a piping system being 
pressure vented or purged shall discharge directly to 
an outdoor location. Purging operations shall com- 
ply with all of the following requirements: 


(1) The point of discharge shall be controlled with 
a shutoff valve. 


(2) The point of discharge shall be located at least 
10 feet (3048 mm) from sources of ignition, at 
least 10 feet (3048 mm) from building openings 
and at least 25 feet (7620 mm) from mechanical 
air intake openings. 

(3) During discharge, the open point of discharge 
shall be continuously attended and monitored 
with a combustible gas indicator that complies 
with Section 1213.6.1.5. 


(4) Purging operations introducing fuel gas shall be 
stopped when 90 percent fuel gas by volume is 
detected within the pipe. 


(5) Persons not involved in the purging operations 
shall be evacuated from all areas within 10 feet 
(3048 mm) of the point of discharge. [NFPA 
54:8.3.1.3] 


1213.6.1.5 Combustible Gas Indicator. Com- 
bustible gas indicators shall be listed and calibrated 
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. 
Combustible gas indicators shall numerically dis- 
play a volume scale from 0 percent to 100 percent in 
1 percent or smaller increments. [NFPA 54:8.3.1.4] 


1213.6.2 Piping Systems Allowed to be Purged 
Indoors or Outdoors. The purging of piping systems 
shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 
1213.6.2.1 where the piping system meets both of the 
following: 


(1) The design operating pressure is 2 psig (14 kPag) or 
less. 


(2) The piping being purged is constructed entirely from 
pipe or tubing not meeting the size and length crite- 
ria of Table 1213.6.1. [NFPA 54:8.3.2] 
1213.6.2.1 Purging Procedure. The piping sys- 
tem shall be purged in accordance with one or more 
of the following: 

(1) The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and 
shall discharge to the outdoors. 

(2) The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and 
shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors 
through an appliance burner not located in a 
combustion chamber. Such burner shall be pro- 
vided with a continuous source of ignition. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


(3) The piping shall be purged with fuel gas and 
shall discharge to the indoors or outdoors 
through a burner that has a continuous source 
of ignition and that is designed for such pur- 
pose. 


(4 


— 


The piping shall be purged with fuel gas that is 
discharged to the indoors or outdoors, and the 
point of discharge shall be monitored with a 
listed combustible gas detector in accordance 
with Section 1213.6.2.2. Purging shall be 
stopped when fuel gas 1s detected. 


(5 


МУ 


The piping shall be purged by ће gas supplier 
in accordance with written procedures. [NFPA 
54:8.3.2.1] 


1213.6.2.2 Combustible Gas Detector. Com- 
bustible gas detectors shall be listed and calibrated 
or tested in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. Combustible gas detectors shall be 
capable of indicating the presence of fuel gas. 
[NFPA 54:8.3.2.2] 


1213.6.3 Purging Appliances and Equipment. 
After the piping system has been placed in operation, 
appliances and equipment shall be purged before being 
placed into operation. [NFPA 54:8.3.3] 


1214.0 Required Gas Supply. 


1214.1 General. The following regulations shall comply 
with this section and Section 1215.0, shall be the standard for 
the installation of gas piping. Natural gas regulations and 
tables are based on the use of a gas having a specific gravity 
of 0.60 and for undiluted liquefied petroleum gas, having a 
specific gravity of 1.50. Where gas of a different specific 
gravity is to be delivered, the specific gravity conversion fac- 
tors provided by the serving gas supplier shall be used in siz- 
ing piping systems from the pipe sizing tables in this chapter. 
1214.2 Volume. The hourly volume of gas required at each 
piping outlet shall be taken as not less than the maximum 
hourly rating as specified by the manufacturer of the appli- 
ance or appliances to be connected to each such outlet. 


1214.3 Gas Appliances. Where the gas appliances to be 
installed have not been specified, Table 1208.3.1 shall be per- 
mitted to be used as a reference to estimate requirements of 
typical appliances. 

To obtain the cubic feet per hour (m?/h) of gas required, 
divide the input of the appliances by the average Btu (kWeh) 
heating value per cubic foot (m?) of the gas. The average Btu 
(kWeh) per cubic foot (m?) of the gas in the area of the instal- 
lation shall be permitted to be obtained from the serving gas 
supplier. 

1214.4 Size of Piping Outlets. The size of the supply pip- 
ing outlet for a gas appliance shall be not less than 4 of an 
inch in diameter (15 mm). 


The size of a piping outlet for a mobile home shall be not 
less than % of an inch in diameter (20 mm). 


233 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


1215.0 Required Gas Piping Size. 


1215.1 Pipe Sizing Methods. Where the pipe size is to be 
determined using any of the methods in Section 1215.1.1 
through Section 1215.1.3, the diameter of each pipe segment 
shall be obtained from the pipe sizing tables in Section 1215.2 
or from the sizing equations in Section 1215.3. [NFPA 54:6.1] 


1215.1.1 Longest Length Method. The pipe size of 
each section of gas piping shall be determined using the 
longest length of piping from the point of delivery to the 
most remote outlet and the load of the section. [NFPA 
54:6.1.1] (see calculation example in Figure 1215.1.1) 
1215.1.2 Branch Length Method. Pipe shall be sized 
as follows: 

(1) Pipe size of each section of the longest pipe run from 
the point of delivery to the most remote outlet shall 
be determined using the longest run of piping and 
the load of the section. 


(2 


МУ 


The pipe size of each section of branch piping not 
previously sized shall be determined using the 
length of piping from the point of delivery to the 
most remote outlet in each branch and the load of 
the section. [NFPA 54:6.1.2] 


1215.1.3 Hybrid Pressure. The pipe size for each sec- 
tion of higher pressure gas piping shall be determined 
using the longest length of piping from the point of deliv- 
ery to the most remote line pressure regulator. The pipe 
size from the line pressure regulator to each outlet shall 
be determined using the length of piping from the regu- 
lator to the most remote outlet served by the regulator. 
[NFPA 54:6.1.3] 
1215.2 Sizing of Gas Piping Systems. Sizing of piping 
systems shall be in accordance with Section 1215.2.1 for nat- 
ural gas piping systems and Section 1215.2.2 for propane pip- 
ing systems. 
1215.2.1 Natural Gas Piping Systems. Table 
1215.2(1) through Table 1215.2(23) shall be used in con- 
junction with one of the methods described in Section 
1215.1.1 through Section 1215.1.3 for piping materials 
other than non-corrugated stainless steel tubing. Section 
1215.3 shall be used in conjunction with one of the meth- 
ods described in Section 1215.1.1 through Section 
1215.1.3 for non-corrugated stainless steel tubing. 
[NFPA 54:6.2.1, 6.2.2] 


1215.2.2 Propane Piping Systems. Table 
1215.2(24) through Table 1215.2(36) shall be used in 
conjunction with one of the methods described in Sec- 
tion 1215.1.1 through Section 1215.1.3 for piping mate- 
rials other than non-corrugated stainless steel tubing. 
Section 1215.3 shall be used in conjunction with one of 
the methods described in Section 1215.1.1 through Sec- 
tion 1215.1.3 for non-corrugated stainless steel tubing. 
[NFPA 54:6.3.1, 6.3.2] 
1215.3 Sizing Equations. The inside diameter of smooth 
wall pipe or tubing shall be determined by Equation 
1215.3(1), Equation 1215.3(2) and Table 1215.3 using the 
equivalent pipe length determined by the methods in Section 
1215.1.1 through Section 1215.1.3. [NFPA 54:6.4] 


234 


LOW-PRESSURE GAS FORMULA (LESS THAN 1.5 psi) 
[NFPA 54:6.4.1] 


[Equation 1215.3(1)] 
Q9381 


AH 0.206 
rt CrxL ) 


inside diameter of pipe, inches 


D= 


О = input rate appliance(s), cubic feet per hour at 60°F 
and 30 inch mercury column 
L = equivalent length of pipe, feet 
AH = pressure drop, inches water column 
Cr = inaccordance with Table 1215.3 
HIGH-PRESSURE GAS FORMULA (1.5 psi AND ABOVE) 
[NFPA 54:6.4.2] 
[Equation 1215.3(2)] 
5 Q9381 
(Р? 3 Р») e Y 0.206 
18.93 [ CrxL | 
Where: 
D - inside diameter of pipe, inches 
О = input rate appliance(s), cubic feet per hour at 60°F 
and 30 inch mercury column 
P, = upstream pressure, psia (P, + 14.7) 
P, = downstream pressure, psia (Р, + 14.7) 
L = equivalent length of pipe, feet 
Cr = inaccordance with Table 1215.3 
Y = inaccordance with Table 1215.3 


For SI units: 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m°, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 
0.293 kW, 1 inch =25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch 
= 6.8947 kPa, °C = (°F-32)/1.8, 1 inch mercury column = 3.39 kPa, 1 inch 
water column = 0.249 kPa 


TABLE 1215.3 
Cr AND Y FOR NATURAL GAS AND UNDILUTED 
PROPANE AT STANDARD CONDITIONS 
[NFPA 54: TABLE 6.4.2] 


FORMULA FACTORS 
GAS 
Cr Y 
Natural Gas 0.6094 0.9992 
Undiluted Propane 1.2462 0.9910 


1215.4 Sizing of Piping Sections. To determine the size 
of each section of pipe in a system within the range of Table 
1215.2(1) through Table 1215.2(36), proceed as follows: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) Measure the length of the pipe from the gas meter loca- 
tion to the most remote outlet on the system. 

(2) Select the length in feet column and row showing the dis- 
tance, or the next longer distance where the table does 
not give the exact length. 


(3 


— 


Starting at the most remote outlet, find in the row just 
selected the gas demand for that outlet. Where the exact 
figure of demand is not shown, choose the next larger 
figure in the row. 


(4) At the top of this column will be found the correct size 
of pipe. 

(5) Using this same row, proceed in a similar manner to each 
section of pipe serving this outlet. For each section of 
pipe, determine the total gas demand supplied by that 
section. Where gas piping sections serve both heating 
and cooling appliances and the installation prevents both 
units from operating simultaneously, the larger ofthe two 
demand loads needs to be used in sizing these sections. 


(6) Size each section of branch piping not previously sized 
by measuring the distance from the gas meter location to 
the most remote outlet in that branch and follow the pro- 
cedures of steps 2, 3, 4, and 5 above. Size branch piping 
in the order of their distance from the meter location, 
beginning with the most distant outlet not previously 
sized. 


1215.5 Engineering Methods. For conditions other than 
those covered by Section 1215.1, such as longer runs or 
greater gas demands, the size of each gas piping system shall 
be determined by standard engineering methods acceptable 
to the Authority Having Jurisdiction, and each such system 
shall be so designed that the total pressure drop between the 
meter or another point of supply and an outlet where full 
demand is being supplied to all outlets, shall be in accordance 
with the requirements of Section 1208.4. 


1215.6 Variable Gas Pressure. Where the supply gas 
pressure exceeds 5 psi (34.6 kPa) for natural gas and 10 psi 
(69 kPa) for undiluted propane or is less than 6 inches (1.5 
kPa) of water column, or where diversity demand factors are 
used, the design, pipe, sizing, materials, location, and use of 
such systems first shall be approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. Piping systems designed for pressures exceeding 
the serving gas supplier's standard delivery pressure shall 
have prior verification from the gas supplier of the availabil- 
ity of the design pressure. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


235 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


FIGURE 1215.1.1 
EXAMPLE ILLUSTRATING USE OF TABLE 1208.3.1 AND TABLE 1215.2(1) 


Problem: Determine the required pipe size of each section and outlet of the piping system shown in Figure 1215.1.1. Gas to be 
used has a specific gravity of 0.60 and 1100 British thermal units (Btu) per cubic foot (0.0114 kWeh/L), delivered at 8 inch water 
column (2.0 kPa) pressure. 


e 
150 000 Btu/h 
Furnace 
30 gallon 
О Automatic 
S S Water Heater 
г Оо oe 
піс c 
თ ZI 
о IL 
ms 
> |დ 
Section 3 Section 2 Section 1 “ 
20 feet 10 feet 10 feet 
[9] 
L C > 
F o AB 
Ф EN 4 
რ sje დ? 
| miS 
Ф I“ Refrigerator 
O 
Gas Meter 
e 
Range 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h 


Solution: 


(1) 


Q) 
(3) 


(4) 


(5) 


236 


Maximum gas demand of Outlet A — 
32 cubic feet per hour (0.91 m?/h) (from Table 1208.3.1). 
Maximum gas demand of Outlet B — 
3 cubic feet per hour (0.08 m?/h) (from Table 1208.3.1). 
Maximum gas demand of Outlet C — 
59 cubic feet per hour (1.67 m?/h) (from Table 1208.3.1). 
Maximum gas demand of Outlet D — 
136 cubic feet per hour (3.85 m?/h) [150 000 Btu/hour (44 kW) divided by 1100 Btu per cubic foot (0.0114 kWeh/L)]. 
The length of pipe from the gas meter to the most remote outlet (Outlet A) is 60 feet (18 288 mm). 
Using the length in feet column row marked 60 feet (18 288 mm) in Table 1215.2(1): 
Outlet A, supplying 32 cubic feet per hour (0.91 m?/h), requires # of an inch (15 mm) pipe. 


Section 1, supplying Outlets A and B, or 35 cubic feet per hour (0.99 m?/h) requires 4 of an inch (15 mm) pipe. 
Section 2, supplying Outlets A, B, and C, or 94 cubic feet per hour (2.66 m?/h) requires % of an inch (20 mm) pipe. 
Section 3, supplying Outlets A, B, C, and D, or 230 cubic feet per hour (6.51 m?/h), requires 1 inch (25 mm) pipe. 
Using the column marked 60 feet (18 288 mm) in Table 1215.2(1): 

Outlet B supplying 3 cubic feet per hour (0.08 m?/h), requires % of an inch (15 mm) pipe. 

Outlet C, supplying 59 cubic feet per hour (1.67 m?/h), requires % of an inch (15 mm) pipe. 

Using the column marked 60 feet (18 288 mm) in Table 1215.2(1): 

Outlet D, supplying 136 cubic feet per hour (3.85 m?/h), requires % of an inch (20 mm) pipe. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(1) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(b)]^:? 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: p 3 1 1% 1% 2 2% 3 4 5 6 8 10 12 
ACTUAL ID: | 0.622 | 0.824 | 1.049 | 1380 | 1.610 | 2.067 | 2.469 | 3.068 | 4.026 | 5.047 | 6.065 7981 10.020 11.938 
"SEE CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 172 | 360 | 678 | 1390 | 2090 | 4020 | 6400 | 11 300 | 23 100 | 41 800 | 67 600 | 139 000 | 252 000 | 399 000 
20 118 | 247 | 466 | 957 | 1430 | 2760 | 4400 | 7780 | 15900 |28 700 | 46 500 | 95500 | 173 000 | 275 000 
30 95 | 199 | 374 | 768 | 1150 | 2220 | 3530 | 6250 | 12700 |23000 | 37300 | 76700 | 139 000 | 220 000 
40 81 | 170 | 320 | 657 | 985 | 1900 | 3020 | 5350 |10900 | 19 700 | 31900 | 65600 | 119000 | 189 000 
50 72 | 151 | 284 | 583 | 873 | 1680 | 2680 | 4740 | 9660 | 17 500 | 28300 | 58200 | 106000 | 167 000 
60 65 | 137 | 257 | 528 | 791 | 1520 | 2430 | 4290 | 8760 | 15 800 | 25600 | 52700 | 95700 | 152 000 
70 60 | 126 | 237 | 486 | 728 | 1400 | 2230 | 3950 | 8050 | 14600 | 23600 | 48500 | 88100 | 139 000 
80 56 | 117 | 220 | 452 | 677 | 1300 | 2080 | 3670 | 7490 | 13 600 | 22000 | 45100 | 81900 | 130000 
90 52 | 110 | 207 | 424 | 635 | 1220 | 1950 | 3450 | 7030 | 12 700 | 20600 | 42300 | 76900 | 122000 
100 50 | 104 | 195 | 400 | 600 | 1160 | 1840 | 3260 | 6640 | 12000 | 19500 | 40000 | 72600 | 115 000 
125 44 | 92 | 173 | 355 | 532 | 1020 | 1630 | 2890 | 5890 |10600| 17200 | 35400 | 64300 | 102 000 
150 40 | 83 | 157 | 322 | 482 | 928 | 1480 | 2610 | 5330 | 9650 | 15600 | 32100 | 58300 | 92300 
175 37 | 77 | 144 | 296 | 443 | 854 | 1360 | 2410 | 4910 | 8880 | 14400 | 29500 | 53600 | 84900 
200 34 | 71 | 134 | 275 | 412 | 794 | 1270 | 2240 | 4560 | 8260 | 13400 | 27500 | 49900 | 79000 
250 30 | 63 | 119 | 244 | 366 | 704 | 1120 | 1980 | 4050 | 7320 | 11900 | 24300 | 44200 | 70000 
300 27 | 57 | 108 | 221 | 331 | 638 | 1020 | 1800 | 3670 | 6630 | 10700 | 22100 | 40100 | 63 400 
350 25 | 53 | 99 | 203 | 305 | 587 | 935 | 1650 | 3370 | 6100 | 9880 | 20300 | 36900 | 58400 
400 23 | 49 | 92 | 189 | 283 | 546 | 870 | 1540 | 3140 | 5680 | 9190 | 18900 | 34300 | 54300 
450 22 | 46 | 86 | 177 | 266 | 512 | 816 | 1440 | 2940 | 5330 | 8620 | 17700 | 32200 | 50900 
500 21 | 43 | 82 | 168 | 251 | 484 | 771 | 1360 | 2780 | 5030 | 8150 | 16700 | 30400 | 48100 
550 20 | 41 | 78 | 159 | 239 | 459 | 732 | 1290 | 2640 | 4780 | 7740 | 15900 | 28900 | 45 700 
600 19 | 39 | 74 | 152 | 228 | 438 | 699 | 1240 | 2520 | 4560 | 7380 | 15200 | 27500 | 43 600 
650 18 | 38 | 71 | 145 | 218 | 420 | 669 | 1180 | 2410 | 4360 | 7070 | 14500 | 26400 | 41800 
700 17 | 36 | 68 | 140 | 209 | 403 | 643 | 1140 | 2320 | 4190 | 6790 | 14000 | 25300 | 40100 
750 17 | 35 | 66 | 135 | 202 | 389 | 619 | 1090 | 2230 | 4040 | 6540 | 13400 | 24400 | 38600 
800 16 | 34 | 63 | 130 | I95 | 375 | 598 | 1060 | 2160 | 3900 | 6320 | 13000 | 23600 | 37300 
850 16 | 33 | 61 | 126 | 189 | 363 | 579 | 1020 | 2090 | 3780 | 6110 | 12600 | 22800 | 36100 
900 15 | 32 | 59 | 122 | 183 | 352 | 561 | 992 | 2020 | 3660 | 5930 | 12200 | 22100 | 35000 
950 15 | 31 | 58 | 118 | 178 | 342 | 545 | 963 | 1960 | 3550 | 5760 | 11800 | 21500 | 34000 
1000 14 | 30 | 56 | 115 | 173 | 333 | 530 | 937 | 1910 | 3460 | 5600 | 11500 | 20900 | 33100 
1100 14 | 28 | 53 | 109 | 164 | 316 | 503 | 890 | 1810 | 3280 | 5320 | 10900 | 19800 | 31400 
1200 13 | 27 | 51 | 104 | 156 | 301 | 480 | 849 | 1730 | 3130 | 5070 | 10400 | 18900 | 30000 
1300 12 | 26 | 49 | 100 | 150 | 289 | 460 | 813 | 1660 | 3000 | 4860 | 9980 | 18100 | 28 700 
1400 12 | 25 | 47 | 96 | 144 | 277 | 442 | 781 | 1590 | 2880 | 4670 | 9590 | 17400 | 27 600 
1500 11 | 24 | 45 | 93 139 | 267 | 426 | 752 | 1530 | 2780 | 4500 | 9240 | 16800 | 26600 
1600 11 | 23 | 44 | 89 | 134 | 258 | 411 | 727 | 1480 | 2680 | 4340 | 8920 | 16200 | 25600 
1700 11 | 22 | 42 | 86 | 130 | 250 | 398 | 703 | 1430 | 2590 | 4200 | 8630 | 15700 | 24800 
1800 10 | 22 | 41 84 | 126 | 242 | 386 | 682 | 1390 | 2520 | 4070 | 8370 | 15200 | 24100 
1900 10 |21 | 40 | 81 122 | 235 | 375 | 662 | 1350 | 2440 | 3960 | 8130 | 14800 | 23400 
2000 NA | 20 | 39 | 79 | 119 | 229 | 364 | 644 | 1310 | 2380 | 3850 | 7910 | 14400 | 22 700 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 

! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 

2 NA means a flow of less than 10 ft3/h (0.283 m?/h). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 237 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(2) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(c)]* 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |3.0 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
INTENDED USE: INITIAL SUPPLY PRESSURE OF 8.0 IN. W.C. OR GREATER 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: Và 34 1 % T^ 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1.610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 454 949 1790 3670 5500 10 600 16 900 29 800 60 800 
20 312 652 1230 2520 3780 7280 11 600 20 500 41 800 
30 250 524 986 2030 3030 5840 9310 16 500 33 600 
40 214 448 844 1730 2600 5000 7970 14 100 28 700 
50 190 397 748 1540 2300 4430 7060 12 500 25 500 
60 172 360 678 1390 2090 4020 6400 11 300 23 100 
70 158 331 624 1280 1920 3690 5890 10 400 21 200 
80 147 308 580 1190 1790 3440 5480 9690 19 800 
90 138 289 544 1120 1670 3230 5140 9090 18 500 
100 131 273 514 1060 1580 3050 4860 8580 17 500 
125 116 242 456 936 1400 2700 4300 7610 15 500 
150 105 219 413 848 1270 2450 3900 6890 14 100 
175 96 202 380 780 1170 2250 3590 6340 12 900 
200 90 188 353 726 1090 2090 3340 5900 12 000 
250 80 166 313 643 964 1860 2960 5230 10 700 
300 72 151 284 583 873 1680 2680 4740 9660 
350 66 139 261 536 803 1550 2470 4360 8890 
400 62 129 243 499 747 1440 2290 4050 8270 
450 58 121 228 468 701 1350 2150 3800 7760 
500 55 114 215 442 662 1280 2030 3590 7330 
550 52 109 204 420 629 1210 1930 3410 6960 
600 50 104 195 400 600 1160 1840 3260 6640 
650 47 99 187 384 575 1110 1760 3120 6360 
700 46 95 179 368 552 1060 1690 3000 6110 
750 44 92 173 355 532 1020 1630 2890 5890 
800 42 89 167 343 514 989 1580 2790 5680 
850 41 86 162 332 497 957 1530 2700 5500 
900 40 83 157 322 482 928 1480 2610 5330 
950 39 81 152 312 468 901 1440 2540 5180 
1000 38 79 148 304 455 877 1400 2470 5040 
1100 36 75 141 289 432 833 1330 2350 4780 
1200 34 71 134 275 412 794 1270 2240 4560 
1300 33 68 128 264 395 761 1210 2140 4370 
1400 31 65 123 253 379 731 1160 2060 4200 
1500 30 63 119 244 366 704 1120 1980 4050 
1600 29 61 115 236 353 680 1080 1920 3910 
1700 28 59 111 228 342 658 1050 1850 3780 
1800 27 57 108 221 331 638 1020 1800 3670 
1900 27 56 105 215 322 619 987 1750 3560 
2000 26 54 102 209 313 602 960 1700 3460 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


238 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(3) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(d)]* 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: [6.0 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: 0.60 
INTENDED USE: INITIAL SUPPLY PRESSURE OF 11.0 IN. W.C. OR GREATER 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: % % 1 1% 1% 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.38 1.61 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
poe H CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

10 660 1380 2600 5340 8000 15 400 24 600 43 400 88 500 
20 454 949 1790 3670 5500 10 600 16 900 29 800 60 800 
30 364 762 1440 2950 4410 8500 13 600 24 000 48 900 
40 312 652 1230 2520 3780 7280 11 600 20 500 41 800 
50 276 578 1090 2240 3350 6450 10 300 18 200 37 100 
60 250 524 986 2030 3030 5840 9310 16 500 33 600 
70 230 482 907 1860 2790 5380 8570 15 100 30 900 
80 214 448 844 1730 2600 5000 7970 14 100 28 700 
90 201 420 792 1630 2440 4690 7480 13 200 27 000 
100 190 397 748 1540 2300 4430 7060 12 500 25 500 
125 168 352 663 1360 2040 3930 6260 11 100 22 600 
150 153 319 601 1230 1850 3560 5670 10 000 20 500 
175 140 293 553 1140 1700 3270 5220 9230 18 800 
200 131 273 514 1056 1580 3050 4860 8580 17 500 
250 116 242 456 936 1400 2700 4300 7610 15 500 
300 105 219 413 848 1270 2450 3900 6890 14 100 
350 96 202 380 780 1170 2250 3590 6340 12 900 
400 90 188 353 726 1090 2090 3340 5900 12 000 
450 84 176 332 681 1020 1960 3130 5540 11 300 
500 80 166 313 643 964 1860 2960 5230 10 700 
550 76 158 297 611 915 1760 2810 4970 10 100 
600 72 151 284 583 873 1680 2680 4740 9660 
650 69 144 272 558 836 1610 2570 4540 9250 
700 66 139 261 536 803 1550 2470 4360 8890 
750 64 134 252 516 774 1490 2380 4200 8560 
800 62 129 243 499 747 1440 2290 4050 8270 
850 60 125 235 483 723 1390 2220 3920 8000 
900 58 121 228 468 701 1350 2150 3800 7760 
950 56 118 221 454 681 1310 2090 3690 7540 
1000 55 114 215 442 662 1280 2030 3590 7330 
1100 52 109 204 420 629 1210 1930 3410 6960 
1200 50 104 195 400 600 1160 1840 3260 6640 
1300 47 99 187 384 575 1110 1760 3120 6360 
1400 46 95 179 368 552 1060 1690 3000 6110 
1500 44 92 173 355 532 1020 1630 2890 5890 
1600 42 89 167 343 514 989 1580 2790 5680 
1700 41 86 162 332 497 957 1530 2700 5500 
1800 40 83 157 322 482 928 1480 2610 5330 
1900 39 81 152 312 468 901 1440 2540 5180 
2000 38 79 148 304 455 877 1400 2470 5040 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m°/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 


* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


239 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(4) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(e)]* 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: % 94 1 TA 1^ 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1.610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
p CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 1510 3040 5560 11 400 17 100 32 900 52 500 92 800 189 000 
20 1070 2150 3930 8070 12 100 23 300 37 100 65 600 134 000 
30 869 1760 3210 6590 9880 19 000 30 300 53 600 109 000 
40 753 1520 2780 5710 8550 16 500 26 300 46 400 94 700 
50 673 1360 2490 5110 7650 14 700 23 500 41 500 84 700 
60 615 1240 2270 4660 6980 13 500 21 400 37 900 77 300 
70 569 1150 2100 4320 6470 12 500 19 900 35 100 71 600 
80 532 1080 1970 4040 6050 11 700 18 600 32 800 67 000 
90 502 1010 1850 3810 5700 11 000 17 500 30 900 63 100 
100 462 934 1710 3510 5260 10 100 16 100 28 500 58 200 
125 414 836 1530 3140 4700 9060 14 400 25 500 52 100 
150 372 751 1370 2820 4220 8130 13 000 22 900 46 700 
175 344 695 1270 2601 3910 7530 12 000 21 200 43 300 
200 318 642 1170 2410 3610 6960 11 100 19 600 40 000 
250 279 583 1040 2140 3210 6180 9850 17 400 35 500 
300 253 528 945 1940 2910 5600 8920 15 800 32 200 
350 232 486 869 1790 2670 5150 8210 14 500 29 600 
400 216 452 809 1660 2490 4790 7640 13 500 27 500 
450 203 424 759 1560 2330 4500 7170 12 700 25 800 
500 192 401 717 1470 2210 4250 6770 12 000 24 400 
550 182 381 681 1400 2090 4030 6430 11 400 23 200 
600 174 363 650 1330 2000 3850 6130 10 800 22 100 
650 166 348 622 1280 1910 3680 5870 10 400 21 200 
700 160 334 598 1230 1840 3540 5640 9970 20 300 
750 154 322 576 1180 1770 3410 5440 9610 19 600 
800 149 311 556 1140 1710 3290 5250 9280 18 900 
850 144 301 538 1100 1650 3190 5080 8980 18 300 
900 139 292 522 1070 1600 3090 4930 8710 17 800 
950 135 283 507 1040 1560 3000 4780 8460 17 200 
1000 132 275 493 1010 1520 2920 4650 8220 16 800 
1100 125 262 468 960 1440 2770 4420 7810 15 900 
1200 119 250 446 917 1370 2640 4220 7450 15 200 
1300 114 239 427 878 1320 2530 4040 7140 14 600 
1400 110 230 411 843 1260 2430 3880 6860 14 000 
1500 106 221 396 812 1220 2340 3740 6600 13 500 
1600 102 214 382 784 1180 2260 3610 6380 13 000 
1700 99 207 370 759 1140 2190 3490 6170 12 600 
1800 96 200 358 736 1100 2120 3390 5980 12 200 
1900 93 195 348 715 1070 2060 3290 5810 11 900 
2000 91 189 339 695 1040 2010 3200 5650 11 500 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot рег hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


240 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(5) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(f)]* 


GAS: NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |3.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 2.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: 1 3 1 1% 1% 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
E CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 2350 4920 9270 19 000 28 500 54 900 87 500 155 000 316 000 
20 1620 3380 6370 13 100 19 600 37 700 60 100 106 000 217 000 
30 1300 2720 5110 10 500 15 700 30 300 48 300 85 400 174 000 
40 1110 2320 4380 8990 13 500 25 900 41 300 73 100 149 000 
50 985 2060 3880 7970 11 900 23 000 36 600 64 800 132 000 
60 892 1870 3520 7220 10 800 20 800 33 200 58 700 120 000 
70 821 1720 3230 6640 9950 19 200 30 500 54 000 110 000 
80 764 1600 3010 6180 9260 17 800 28 400 50 200 102 000 
90 717 1500 2820 5800 8680 16 700 26 700 47 100 96 100 
100 671 1420 2670 5470 8200 15 800 25 200 44 500 90 800 
125 600 1250 2360 4850 7270 14 000 22 300 39 500 80 500 
150 544 1140 2140 4400 6590 12 700 20 200 35 700 72 900 
175 500 1050 1970 4040 6060 11 700 18 600 32 900 67 100 
200 465 973 1830 3760 5640 10 900 17 300 30 600 62 400 
250 412 862 1620 3330 5000 9620 15 300 27 100 55 300 
300 374 781 1470 3020 4530 8720 13 900 24 600 50 100 
350 344 719 1350 2780 4170 8020 12 800 22 600 46 100 
400 320 669 1260 2590 3870 7460 11 900 21 000 42 900 
450 300 627 1180 2430 3640 7000 11 200 19 700 40 200 
500 283 593 1120 2290 3430 6610 10 500 18 600 38 000 
550 269 563 1060 2180 3260 6280 10 000 17 700 36 100 
600 257 537 1010 2080 3110 5990 9550 16 900 34 400 
650 246 514 969 1990 2980 5740 9150 16 200 33 000 
700 236 494 93] 1910 2860 5510 8790 15 500 31 700 
750 228 476 897 1840 2760 5310 8470 15 000 30 500 
800 220 460 866 1780 2660 5130 8180 14 500 29 500 
850 213 445 838 1720 2580 4960 7910 14 000 28 500 
900 206 431 812 1670 2500 4810 7670 13 600 27 700 
950 200 419 789 1620 2430 4670 7450 13 200 26 900 
1000 195 407 767 1580 2360 4550 7240 12 800 26 100 
1100 185 387 729 1500 2240 4320 6890 12 200 24 800 
1200 177 369 695 1430 2140 4120 6570 11 600 23 700 
1300 169 353 666 1370 2050 3940 6290 11 100 22 700 
1400 162 340 640 1310 1970 3790 6040 10 700 21 800 
1500 156 327 616 1270 1900 3650 5820 10 300 21 000 
1600 151 316 595 1220 1830 3530 5620 10 000 20 300 
1700 146 306 576 1180 1770 3410 5440 9610 19 600 
1800 142 296 558 1150 1720 3310 5270 9320 19 000 
1900 138 288 542 1110 1670 3210 5120 9050 18 400 
2000 134 280 527 1080 1620 3120 4980 8800 18 000 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


241 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(6) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(g)]* 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: 5.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |3.5 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: 1 34 1 1% 1^ 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1.610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
E CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 3190 6430 11 800 24 200 36 200 69 700 111 000 196 000 401 000 
20 2250 4550 8320 17 100 25 600 49 300 78 600 139 000 283 000 
30 1840 3720 6790 14 000 20 900 40 300 64 200 113 000 231 000 
40 1590 3220 5880 12 100 18 100 34 900 55 600 98 200 200 000 
50 1430 2880 5260 10 800 16 200 31 200 49 700 87 900 179 000 
60 1300 2630 4800 9860 14 800 28 500 45 400 80 200 164 000 
70 1200 2430 4450 9130 13 700 26 400 42 000 74 300 151 000 
80 1150 2330 4260 8540 12 800 24 700 39 300 69 500 142 000 
90 1060 2150 3920 8050 12 100 23 200 37 000 65 500 134 000 
100 979 1980 3620 7430 11 100 21 400 34 200 60 400 123 000 
125 876 1770 3240 6640 9950 19 200 30 600 54 000 110 000 
150 786 1590 2910 5960 8940 17 200 27 400 48 500 98 900 
175 728 1470 2690 5520 8270 15 900 25 400 44 900 91 600 
200 673 1360 2490 5100 7650 14 700 23 500 41 500 84 700 
250 558 1170 2200 4510 6760 13 000 20 800 36 700 74 900 
300 506 1060 1990 4090 6130 11 800 18 800 33 300 67 800 
350 465 973 1830 3760 5640 10 900 17 300 30 600 62 400 
400 433 905 1710 3500 5250 10 100 16 100 28 500 58 100 
450 406 849 1600 3290 4920 9480 15 100 26 700 54 500 
500 384 802 1510 3100 4650 8950 14 300 25 200 51 500 
550 364 762 1440 2950 4420 8500 13 600 24 000 48 900 
600 348 727 1370 2810 4210 8110 12 900 22 900 46 600 
650 333 696 1310 2690 4030 7770 12 400 21 900 44 600 
700 320 669 1260 2590 3880 7460 11 900 21 000 42 900 
750 308 644 1210 2490 3730 7190 11 500 20 300 41 300 
800 298 622 1170 2410 3610 6940 11 100 19 600 39 900 
850 288 602 1130 2330 3490 6720 10 700 18 900 38 600 
900 279 584 1100 2260 3380 6520 10 400 18 400 37 400 
950 271 567 1070 2190 3290 6330 10 100 17 800 36 400 
1000 264 551 1040 2130 3200 6150 9810 17 300 35 400 
1100 250 524 987 2030 3030 5840 9320 16 500 33 600 
1200 239 500 941 1930 2900 5580 8890 15 700 32 000 
1300 229 478 901 1850 2770 5340 8510 15 000 30 700 
1400 220 460 866 1780 2660 5130 8180 14 500 29 500 
1500 212 443 834 1710 2570 4940 7880 13 900 28 400 
1600 205 428 806 1650 2480 4770 7610 13 400 27 400 
1700 198 414 780 1600 2400 4620 7360 13 000 26 500 
1800 192 401 756 1550 2330 4480 7140 12 600 25 700 
1900 186 390 734 1510 2260 4350 6930 12 300 25 000 
2000 181 379 714 1470 2200 4230 6740 11 900 24 300 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


242 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(7) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(h)]':? 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |0.3 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: V 35 VA 56 % 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 36 % % 34 V 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:3 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

10 20 42 85 148 210 448 806 1270 2650 
20 14 29 58 102 144 308 554 873 1820 
30 11 23 47 82 116 247 445 701 1460 
40 10 20 40 70 99 211 381 600 1250 
50 NA 17 35 62 88 187 337 532 1110 
60 NA 16 32 56 79 170 306 482 1000 
70 NA 14 29 52 73 156 281 443 924 
80 МА 13 27 48 68 145 262 413 859 
90 МА 13 26 45 64 136 245 387 806 
100 МА 12 24 43 60 129 232 366 761 
125 МА 11 22 38 53 114 206 324 675 
150 МА 10 20 34 48 103 186 294 612 
175 МА МА 18 31 45 95 171 270 563 
200 МА МА 17 29 41 89 159 251 523 
250 МА МА 15 26 37 78 141 223 464 
300 МА МА 13 23 33 71 128 202 420 
350 МА МА 12 22 31 65 118 186 387 
400 МА МА 11 20 28 61 110 173 360 
450 МА МА 11 19 27 57 103 162 338 
500 NA NA 10 18 25 54 97 153 319 
550 NA NA NA 17 24 51 92 145 303 
600 МА МА МА 16 23 49 88 139 289 
650 МА МА МА 15 22 47 84 133 277 
700 МА МА МА 15 21 45 81 128 266 
750 МА МА МА 14 20 43 78 123 256 
800 МА МА МА 14 20 42 75 119 247 
850 МА МА МА 13 19 40 73 115 239 
900 МА МА МА 13 18 39 71 111 232 
950 МА МА МА 13 18 38 69 108 225 
1000 МА МА МА 12 17 37 67 105 219 
1100 NA NA NA 12 16 35 63 100 208 
1200 NA NA NA 11 16 34 60 95 199 
1300 МА МА МА 11 15 32 58 91 190 
1400 МА МА МА 10 14 31 56 88 183 
1500 МА МА МА МА 14 30 54 84 176 
1600 МА МА МА МА 13 29 52 82 170 
1700 NA NA NA NA 13 28 50 79 164 
1800 NA NA NA NA 13 27 49 77 159 
1900 МА МА МА МА 12 26 47 74 155 
2000 МА МА МА МА 12 25 46 72 151 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 

! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 

2 NA means a flow of less than 10 ft?/h (0.283 m?/h). 


? Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 243 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(8) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(1)]' 2 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: VA 35 1 % 3A 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 35 VA % 34 V 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:3 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

10 27 55 111 195 276 590 1060 1680 3490 
20 18 38 77 134 190 406 730 1150 2400 
30 15 30 61 107 152 326 586 925 1930 
40 13 26 53 92 131 279 502 791 1650 
50 11 23 47 82 116 247 445 701 1460 
60 10 21 42 74 105 224 403 635 1320 
70 МА 19 39 68 96 206 371 585 1220 
80 МА 18 36 63 90 192 345 544 1130 
90 МА 17 34 59 84 180 324 510 1060 
100 МА 16 32 56 79 170 306 482 1000 
125 МА 14 28 50 70 151 271 427 890 
150 МА 13 26 45 64 136 245 387 806 
175 МА 12 24 41 59 125 226 356 742 
200 NA 11 22 39 55 117 210 331 690 
250 МА МА 20 34 48 103 186 294 612 
300 МА МА 18 31 44 94 169 266 554 
350 МА МА 16 28 40 86 155 245 510 
400 МА МА 15 26 38 80 144 228 474 
450 МА МА 14 25 35 75 135 214 445 
500 МА МА 13 23 33 71 128 202 420 
550 МА МА 13 22 32 68 122 192 399 
600 NA NA 12 21 30 64 116 183 381 
650 NA NA 12 20 29 62 111 175 365 
700 МА МА 11 20 28 59 107 168 350 
750 МА МА 11 19 27 57 103 162 338 
800 МА МА 10 18 26 55 99 156 326 
850 МА МА 10 18 25 53 96 151 315 
900 МА МА МА 17 24 52 93 147 306 
950 NA NA NA 17 24 50 90 143 297 
1000 NA NA NA 16 23 49 88 139 289 
1100 NA NA NA 15 22 46 84 132 274 
1200 NA NA NA 15 21 44 80 126 262 
1300 NA NA NA 14 20 42 76 120 251 
1400 NA NA NA 13 19 4l 73 116 241 
1500 NA NA NA 13 18 39 7 111 232 
1600 МА МА МА 13 18 38 68 108 224 
1700 МА МА МА 12 17 37 66 104 217 
1800 МА МА МА 12 17 36 64 101 210 
1900 МА МА МА 11 16 35 62 98 204 
2000 NA NA NA 11 16 34 60 95 199 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 

! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 

2 NA means a flow of less than 10 f/h (0.283 m?/h). 


5 Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


244 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(9) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(j)]":2 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 1.0 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
INTENDED USE: TUBE SIZING BETWEEN HOUSE LINE REGULATOR AND THE APPLIANCE 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: L % % % % 1 1% 1^ 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 36 % % 3A V 1% 1% = = 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE: 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

10 39 80 162 283 402 859 1550 2440 5080 
20 27 55 111 195 276 590 1060 1680 3490 
30 21 44 89 156 222 474 853 1350 2800 
40 18 38 TT 134 190 406 730 1150 2400 
50 16 33 68 119 168 359 647 1020 2130 
60 15 30 61 107 152 326 586 925 1930 
70 13 28 57 99 140 300 539 851 1770 
80 13 26 53 92 131 279 502 791 1650 
90 12 24 49 86 122 262 471 742 1550 
100 11 23 47 82 116 247 445 701 1460 
125 МА 20 41 72 103 219 394 622 1290 
150 МА 18 37 65 93 198 357 563 1170 
175 NA 17 34 60 85 183 329 518 1080 
200 NA 16 32 56 79 170 306 482 1000 
250 NA 14 28 50 70 151 271 427 890 
300 NA 13 26 45 64 136 245 387 806 
350 NA 12 24 41 59 125 226 356 742 
400 NA 11 22 39 55 117 210 331 690 
450 NA 10 21 36 51 110 197 311 647 
500 NA NA 20 34 48 103 186 294 612 
550 NA NA 19 32 46 98 177 279 581 
600 NA NA 18 31 44 94 169 266 554 
650 NA NA 17 30 42 90 162 255 531 
700 NA NA 16 28 40 86 155 245 510 
750 NA NA 16 27 39 83 150 236 491 
800 NA NA 15 26 38 80 144 228 474 
850 NA NA 15 26 36 78 140 220 459 
900 NA NA 14 25 35 75 135 214 445 
950 NA NA 14 24 34 73 132 207 432 
1000 NA NA 13 23 33 71 128 202 420 
1100 NA NA 13 22 32 68 122 192 399 
1200 NA NA 12 21 30 64 116 183 381 
1300 NA NA 12 20 29 62 111 175 365 
1400 NA NA 11 20 28 59 107 168 350 
1500 NA NA 11 19 27 57 103 162 338 
1600 NA NA 10 18 26 55 99 156 326 
1700 NA NA 10 18 25 53 96 151 315 
1800 NA NA NA 17 24 52 93 147 306 
1900 NA NA NA 17 24 50 90 143 297 
2000 NA NA NA 16 23 49 88 139 289 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 

! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 

2 NA means a flow of less than 10 ft/h (0.283 m?/h). 


5 Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 245 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(10) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(k)]? 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 17.0 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: % 36 % 5% 3A 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 3 % 5% 3A V 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:' 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 190 391 796 1390 1970 4220 7590 12 000 24 900 
20 130 269 547 956 1360 2900 5220 8230 17 100 
30 105 216 439 768 1090 2330 4190 6610 13 800 
40 90 185 376 657 932 1990 3590 5650 11 800 
50 79 164 333 582 826 1770 3180 5010 10 400 
60 72 148 302 528 749 1600 2880 4540 9460 
70 66 137 278 486 689 1470 2650 4180 8700 
80 62 127 258 452 641 1370 2460 3890 8090 
90 58 119 243 424 601 1280 2310 3650 7590 
100 55 113 229 400 568 1210 2180 3440 7170 
125 48 100 203 355 503 1080 1940 3050 6360 
150 44 90 184 321 456 974 1750 2770 5760 
175 40 83 169 296 420 896 1610 2540 5300 
200 38 77 157 275 390 834 1500 2370 4930 
250 33 69 140 244 346 739 1330 2100 4370 
300 30 62 126 221 313 670 1210 1900 3960 
350 28 57 116 203 288 616 1110 1750 3640 
400 26 53 108 189 268 573 1030 1630 3390 
450 24 50 102 177 252 538 968 1530 3180 
500 23 47 96 168 238 508 914 1440 3000 
550 22 45 91 159 226 482 868 1370 2850 
600 21 43 87 152 215 460 829 1310 2720 
650 20 41 83 145 206 441 793 1250 2610 
700 19 39 80 140 198 423 762 1200 2500 
750 18 38 77 135 191 408 734 1160 2410 
800 18 37 74 130 184 394 709 1120 2330 
850 17 35 72 126 178 281 686 1080 2250 
900 17 34 70 122 173 370 665 1050 2180 
950 16 33 68 118 168 359 646 1020 2120 
1000 16 32 66 115 163 349 628 991 2060 
1100 15 3] 63 109 155 332 597 941 1960 
1200 14 29 60 104 148 316 569 898 1870 
1300 14 28 57 100 142 303 545 860 1790 
1400 13 27 55 96 136 291 524 826 1720 
1500 13 26 53 93 131 280 505 796 1660 
1600 12 25 51 89 127 271 487 768 1600 
1700 12 24 49 86 123 262 472 744 1550 
1800 11 24 48 84 119 254 457 721 1500 
1900 11 23 47 81 115 247 444 700 1460 
2000 11 22 45 79 112 240 432 681 1420 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 т?/һ, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 
! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


246 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(11) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(1)]? 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | 2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: L % % % % 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: % % % % V 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:' 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 245 506 1030 1800 2550 5450 9820 15 500 32 200 
20 169 348 708 1240 1760 3750 6750 10 600 22 200 
30 135 279 568 993 1410 3010 5420 8550 17 800 
40 116 239 486 850 1210 2580 4640 7310 15 200 
50 103 212 431 754 1070 2280 4110 6480 13 500 
60 93 192 391 683 969 2070 3730 5870 12 200 
70 86 177 359 628 891 1900 3430 5400 11 300 
80 80 164 334 584 829 1770 3190 5030 10 500 
90 75 154 314 548 778 1660 2990 4720 9820 
100 71 146 296 518 735 1570 2830 4450 9280 
125 63 129 263 459 651 1390 2500 3950 8220 
150 57 117 238 416 590 1260 2270 3580 7450 
175 52 108 219 383 543 1160 2090 3290 6850 
200 49 100 204 356 505 1080 1940 3060 6380 
250 43 89 181 315 448 956 1720 2710 5650 
300 39 80 164 286 406 866 1560 2460 5120 
350 36 74 150 263 373 797] 1430 2260 4710 
400 33 69 140 245 347 741 1330 2100 4380 
450 31 65 131 230 326 696 1250 1970 4110 
500 30 61 124 217 308 657 1180 1870 3880 
550 28 58 118 206 292 624 1120 1770 3690 
600 27 55 112 196 279 595 1070 1690 3520 
650 26 53 108 188 267 570 1030 1620 3370 
700 25 51 103 181 256 548 986 1550 3240 
750 24 49 100 174 247 528 950 1500 3120 
800 23 47 96 168 239 510 917 1450 3010 
850 22 46 93 163 231 493 888 1400 2920 
900 22 44 90 158 224 478 861 1360 2830 
950 21 43 88 153 217 464 836 1320 2740 
1000 20 42 85 149 211 452 813 1280 2670 
1100 19 40 81 142 201 429 772 1220 2540 
1200 18 38 77 135 192 409 737 1160 2420 
1300 18 36 74 129 183 392 705 1110 2320 
1400 17 35 71 124 176 376 678 1070 2230 
1500 16 34 68 120 170 363 653 1030 2140 
1600 16 33 66 116 164 350 630 994 2070 
1700 15 31 64 112 159 339 610 962 2000 
1800 15 30 62 108 154 329 592 933 1940 
1900 14 30 60 105 149 319 575 906 1890 
2000 14 29 59 102 145 310 559 881 1830 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 
! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 247 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(12) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(m)f? 


GAS: NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |1.5 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN POINT OF DELIVERY AND THE HOUSE LINE REGULATOR. TOTAL LOAD SUPPLIED BY A 
SINGLE HOUSE LINE REGULATOR NOT EXCEEDING 150 CUBIC FEET PER HOUR.” 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: V 36 % % % 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: ася: % 5 % % % 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:' 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 303 625 1270 2220 3150 6740 12 100 19 100 39 800 
20 208 430 874 1530 2170 4630 8330 13 100 27 400 
30 167 345 702 1230 1740 3720 6690 10 600 22 000 
40 143 295 601 1050 1490 3180 5730 9030 18 800 
50 127 262 532 931 1320 2820 5080 8000 16 700 
60 115 237 482 843 1200 2560 4600 7250 15 100 
70 106 218 444 776 1100 2350 4230 6670 13 900 
80 98 203 413 722 1020 2190 3940 6210 12 900 
90 92 190 387 677 961 2050 3690 5820 12 100 
100 87 180 366 640 907 1940 3490 5500 11 500 
125 77 159 324 567 804 1720 3090 4880 10 200 
150 70 144 294 514 729 1560 2800 4420 9200 
175 64 133 270 472 670 1430 2580 4060 8460 
200 60 124 252 440 624 1330 2400 3780 7870 
250 53 110 223 390 553 1180 2130 3350 6980 
300 48 99 202 353 501 1070 1930 3040 6320 
350 44 91 186 325 461 984 1770 2790 5820 
400 41 85 173 302 429 916 1650 2600 5410 
450 39 80 162 283 402 859 1550 2440 5080 
500 36 75 153 268 380 811 1460 2300 4800 
550 35 72 146 254 361 771 1390 2190 4560 
600 33 68 139 243 344 735 1320 2090 4350 
650 32 65 133 232 330 704 1270 2000 4160 
700 30 63 128 223 317 676 1220 1920 4000 
750 29 60 123 215 305 652 1170 1850 3850 
800 28 58 119 208 295 629 1130 1790 3720 
850 27 ЭТ 115 201 285 609 1100 1730 3600 
900 27 55 111 195 276 590 1060 1680 3490 
950 26 53 108 189 268 573 1030 1630 3390 
1000 25 52 105 184 261 558 1000 1580 3300 
1100 24 49 100 175 248 530 954 1500 3130 
1200 23 47 95 167 237 505 910 1430 2990 
1300 22 45 91 160 227 484 871 1370 2860 
1400 21 43 88 153 218 465 837 1320 2750 
1500 20 42 85 148 210 448 806 1270 2650 
1600 19 40 82 143 202 432 779 1230 2560 
1700 19 39 79 138 196 419 753 1190 2470 
1800 18 38 77 134 190 406 731 1150 2400 
1900 18 37 74 130 184 394 709 1120 2330 
2000 17 36 72. 126 179 383 690 1090 2270 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch — 6.8947 kPa 
Notes: 
! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


? Where this table is used to size the tubing upstream of a line pressure regulator, the pipe or tubing downstream of the line pressure regulator shall be sized using 
a pressure drop no greater than 1 inch water column (0.249 kPa). 
? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


248 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(13) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(n)]2 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: 5.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |3.5 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: V 35 % 5% 34 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 36 % 56 % % 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:' 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 511 1050 2140 3750 5320 11 400 20 400 32 200 67 100 
20 351 724 1470 2580 3650 7800 14 000 22 200 46 100 
30 282 582 1180 2070 2930 6270 11 300 17 800 37 000 
40 241 498 1010 1770 2510 5360 9660 15 200 31 700 
50 214 441 898 1570 2230 4750 8560 13 500 28 100 
60 194 400 813 1420 2020 4310 7750 12 200 25 500 
70 178 368 748 1310 1860 3960 7130 11 200 23 400 
80 166 342 696 1220 1730 3690 6640 10 500 21 800 
90 156 321 653 1140 1620 3460 6230 9820 20 400 
100 147 303 617 1080 1530 3270 5880 9270 19 300 
125 130 269 547 955 1360 2900 5210 8220 17 100 
150 118 243 495 866 1230 2620 4720 7450 15 500 
175 109 224 456 796 1130 2410 4350 6850 14 300 
200 101 208 424 741 1050 2250 4040 6370 13 300 
250 90 185 376 657 932 1990 3580 5650 11 800 
300 81 167 340 595 844 1800 3250 5120 10 700 
350 75 154 313 547 797 1660 2990 4710 9810 
400 69 143 291 509 722 1540 2780 4380 9120 
450 65 134 273 478 678 1450 2610 4110 8560 
500 62 127 258 451 640 1370 2460 3880 8090 
550 58 121 245 429 608 1300 2340 3690 7680 
600 56 115 234 409 580 1240 2230 3520 7330 
650 53 110 224 392 556 1190 2140 3370 7020 
700 51 106 215 376 534 1140 2050 3240 6740 
750 49 102 207 362 514 1100 1980 3120 6490 
800 48 98 200 350 497 1060 1910 3010 6270 
850 46 95 194 339 481 1030 1850 2910 6070 
900 45 92 188 328 466 1000 1790 2820 5880 
950 43 90 182 319 452 967 1740 2740 5710 
1000 42 87 177 310 440 940 1690 2670 5560 
1100 40 83 169 295 418 893 1610 2530 5280 
1200 38 79 161 281 399 852 1530 2420 5040 
1300 37 76 154 269 382 816 1470 2320 4820 
1400 35 73 148 259 367 784 1410 2220 4630 
1500 34 70 143 249 353 755 1360 2140 4460 
1600 33 68 138 241 341 729 1310 2070 4310 
1700 32 65 133 233 330 705 1270 2000 4170 
1800 3] 63 129 226 320 684 1230 1940 4040 
1900 30 62 125 219 311 664 1200 1890 3930 
2000 29 60 122 213 302 646 1160 1830 3820 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


249 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(14) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(0)]' 2 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION:| 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
5 46 63 115 134 225 270 471 546 895 1037 1790 2070 3660 4140 
10 32 44 82 95 161 192 330 383 639 746 1260 1470 2600 2930 
15 25 35 66 TI 132 157 267 310 524 615 1030 1200 2140 2400 
20 22 31 58 67 116 137 231 269 456 536 888 1050 1850 2080 
25 19 27 52 60 104 122 206 240 409 482 793 936 1660 1860 
30 18 25 47 55 96 112 188 218 374 442 723 856 1520 1700 
40 15 21 4] 47 83 97 162 188 325 386 625 742 1320 1470 
50 13 19 37 42 75 87 144 168 292 347 559 665 1180 1320 
60 12 17 34 38 68 80 131 153 267 318 509 608 1080 1200 
70 11 16 31 36 63 74 121 141 248 295 471 563 1000 1110 
80 10 15 29 33 60 69 113 132 232 277 440 527 940 1040 
90 10 14 28 32 57 65 107 125 219 262 415 498 887 983 
100 9 13 26 30 54 62 101 118 208 249 393 472 843 933 
150 7 10 20 23 42 48 78 91 171 205 320 387 691 762 
200 6 9 18 21 38 44 71 82 148 179 277 336 600 661 
250 5 გ 16 19 34 39 63 74 133 161 247 301 538 591 
300 5 7 15 17 32 36 57 67 95 148 226 275 492 540 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, | inch water column = 0.249 kPa 

Notes: 

! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 

? Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by an 
equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, or both. 

? EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the 
greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


250 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(15) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(р)]' 2 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |3.0 іп. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
INTENDED USE: INITIAL SUPPLY PRESSURE OF 8.0 INCH WATER COLUMN OR GREATER 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION: | 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

5 120 160 | 277 327 529 649 1180 1370 2140 | 2423 | 4430 | 5010 | 8800 |10 100 
10 83 112 197 231 380 462 828 958 1530 1740 | 3200 | 3560 | 6270 | 7160 
15 67 90 161 189 313 379 673 778 1250 1433 | 2540 | 2910 | 5140 | 5850 
20 57 78 140 164 273 329 580 672 1090 1249 | 2200 | 2530 | 4460 | 5070 
25 51 69 125 147 245 295 518 599 978 1123 | 1960 | 2270 | 4000 | 4540 
30 46 63 115 134 225 270 471 546 895 1029 | 1790 | 2070 | 3660 | 4140 
40 39 54 100 116 196 234 407 471 778 897 | 1550 | 1800 | 3180 | 3590 
50 35 48 89 104 176 210 363 421 698 806 | 1380 | 1610 | 2850 | 3210 
60 32 44 82 95 161 192 330 383 639 739 | 1260 | 1470 | 2600 | 2930 
70 29 41 76 88 150 178 306 355 593 686 | 1170 | 1360 | 2420 | 2720 
80 27 38 71 82 141 167 285 331 555 644 | 1090 | 1280 | 2260 | 2540 
90 26 36 67 77 133 157 268 311 524 609 | 1030 | 1200 | 2140 | 2400 
100 24 34 63 73 126 149 254 295 498 579 974 | 1140 | 2030 | 2280 
150 19 27 52 60 104 122 206 240 409 477 793 936 1660 | 1860 
200 17 23 45 32 91 106 178 207 355 415 686 812 1440 | 1610 
250 15 21 40 46 82 95 159 184 319 373 613 728 1290 | 1440 
300 13 19 37 42 75 87 144 168 234 342 559 665 1180 | 1320 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 


! Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


? Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by 


an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L — 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


EHD - Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 251 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(16) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(9)]' 2 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 6.0 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
INTENDED USE: INITIAL SUPPLY PRESSURE OF 11.0 INCH WATER COLUMN OR GREATER 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION: | 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
5 173 229 389 461 737 911 1690 1950 | 3000 | 3375 | 6280 | 7050 | 12400 | 14 260 
10 120 160 277 327 529 649 1180 1370 | 2140 | 2423 | 4430 | 5010 | 8800 | 10 100 
15 96 130 227 267 436 532 960 1110 1760 1996 | 3610 | 4100 | 7210 | 8260 
20 83 112 197 231 380 462 828 958 1530 1740 | 3120 | 3560 | 6270 | 7160 
25 74 99 176 207 342 414 739 855 1370 1564 | 2790 | 3190 | 5620 | 6400 
30 67 | 90 | 161 | 189 | 313 | 379 | 673 | 778 | 1250 | 1433 | 2540 | 2910 | 5140 | 5850 
40 57 78 140 164 273 329 580 672 1090 1249 | 2200 | 2530 | 4460 | 5070 
50 51 69 125 147 245 295 518 599 978 1123 1960 | 2270 | 4000 | 4540 
60 46 63 115 134 225 270 471 546 895 1029 1790 | 2070 | 3660 | 4140 
70 42 58 106 124 209 250 435 505 830 956 1660 1920 | 3390 | 3840 
80 39 54 100 116 196 234 407 471 778 897 1550 1800 | 3180 | 3590 
90 37 51 94 109 185 221 383 444 735 848 1460 1700 | 3000 | 3390 
100 35 48 89 104 176 210 363 421 698 806 1380 1610 | 2850 | 3210 
150 28 39 73 85 145 172 294 342 573 664 1130 1320 | 2340 | 2630 
200 24 34 63 73 126 149 254 295 498 579 974 1140 | 2030 | 2280 
250 21 30 57 66 114 134 226 263 447 520 870 1020 1820 | 2040 
300 19 27 52 60 104 122 206 240 409 477 793 936 1660 1860 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 


Notes: 


' Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


? Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by 


an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


252 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(17) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(r)]: >34 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: 2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
TUBE SIZE (EHD) 
FLOW DESIGNATION: | 13 | 15 | 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 

10 270 | 353 | 587 | 700 | 1100 | 1370 | 2590 | 2990 | 4510 | 5037 9600 10700 | 18600 | 21 600 
25 166 | 220 | 374 | 444 709 876 1620 | 1870 | 2890 | 3258 6040 6780 11900 | 13 700 
30 151 | 200 | 342 | 405 650 801 1480 | 1700 | 2640 | 2987 5510 6200 10 900 | 12 500 
40 129 | 172 | 297 | 351 567 696 1270 | 1470 | 2300 | 2605 4760 5380 9440 10 900 
50 115 | 154 | 266 | 314 510 624 1140 | 1310 | 2060 | 2343 4260 4820 8470 9720 
75 93 124 | 218 | 257 420 512 922 1070 | 1690 | 1932 3470 3950 6940 7940 
80 89 | 120 | 211 | 249 407 496 892 1030 | 1640 | 1874 3360 3820 6730 7690 
100 79 | 107 | 189 | 222 366 445 795 920 1470 | 1685 3000 3420 6030 6880 
150 64 87 155 182 302 364 646 748 1210 | 1389 2440 2800 4940 5620 
200 55 75 135 157 263 317 557 645 1050 | 1212 2110 2430 4290 4870 
250 49 67 121 141 236 284 497 576 941 1090 1890 2180 3850 4360 
300 44 61 110 129 217 260 453 525 862 999 1720 1990 3520 3980 
400 38 52 96 111 189 225 390 453 749 871 1490 1730 3060 3450 
500 34 46 86 100 170 202 348 404 552 783 1330 1550 2740 3090 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
Notes: 


! Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 0.75 psi (5.17 kPa), DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with 
regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across a regulator are capable of varying with flow rate. 


N 


CAUTION: Capacities shown in table are capable of exceeding maximum capacity for a selected regulator. Consult with regulator or tubing manufacturer for guid- 
ance. 
Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by an 


equivalent length of tubing according to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, the greater 
the gas capacity of the tubing. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 253 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(18) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(s)]^ 2, 3,4 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |5.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 3.5 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION:| 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 523 | 674 | 1080 | 1300 | 2000 | 2530 | 4920 | 5660 | 8300 | 9140 | 18100 | 19800 | 34 400 | 40 400 
25 322 | 420 | 691 827 1290 | 1620 | 3080 | 3540 | 5310 | 5911 | 11400 | 12600 | 22000 | 25 600 
30 292 | 382 | 632 755 1180 | 1480 | 2800 | 3230 | 4860 | 5420 | 10400 | 11500 | 20100 | 23 400 
40 251 | 329 | 549 654 1030 | 1280 | 2420 | 2790 | 4230 | 4727 | 8970 10000 | 17400 | 20 200 
50 223 | 293 | 492 586 926 1150 | 2160 | 2490 | 3790 | 4251 8020 8930 15 600 | 18 100 
75 180 | 238 | 403 479 763 944 1750 | 2020 | 3110 | 3506 | 6530 7320 12 800 | 14 800 
80 174 | 230 | 391 463 740 915 1690 | 1960 | 3020 | 3400 | 6320 7090 12 400 | 14 300 
100 154 | 205 | 350 415 665 820 1510 | 1740 | 2710 | 3057 | 5650 6350 11100 | 12 800 
150 124 | 166 | 287 339 548 672 1230 | 1420 | 2220 | 2521 4600 5200 9130 | 10500 
200 107 | 143 | 249 294 478 584 1060 | 1220 1930 | 2199 | 3980 4510 7930 9090 
250 95 | 128 | 223 263 430 524 945 1090 1730 | 1977 | 3550 4040 7110 8140 
300 86 | 116 | 204 240 394 479 860 995 1590 | 1813 | 3240 3690 6500 7430 
400 74 | 100 | 177 208 343 416 742 858 1380 | 1581 2800 3210 5650 6440 
500 66 89 159 186 309 373 662 766 1040 | 1422 | 2500 2870 5060 5760 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
Notes: 


! Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 1 psi (7 kPa), DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with 


regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across regulator are capable of varying with the flow rate. 


N 


CAUTION: Capacities shown in table are capable of exceeding the maximum capacity of selected regulator. Consult tubing manufacturer for guidance. 
Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by 


an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (feet) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


254 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(19) 
POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(t)]* 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 0.3 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: 0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 

NOMINAL OD: % % 1 1% 1% 2 3 4 
DESIGNATION: SDR 9.3 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 10 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.660 0.860 1.077 1.328 1554 1.943 2.864 3.682 

LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 153 305 551 955 1440 2590 7170 13 900 
20 105 210 379 656 991 1780 4920 9520 
30 84 169 304 5277 796 1430 3950 7640 
40 72 144 260 451 681 1220 3380 6540 
50 64 128 231 400 604 1080 3000 5800 
60 58 116 209 362 547 983 2720 5250 
70 53 107 192 333 503 904 2500 4830 
80 50 99 179 310 468 841 2330 4500 
90 46 93 168 291 439 789 2180 4220 
100 44 88 159 275 415 745 2060 3990 
125 39 78 141 243 368 661 1830 3530 
150 35 71 127 221 333 598 1660 3200 
175 32 65 117 203 306 551 1520 2940 
200 30 60 109 189 285 512 1420 2740 
250 27 54 97 167 253 454 1260 2430 
300 24 48 88 152 229 411 1140 2200 
350 22 45 81 139 211 378 1050 2020 
400 21 42 75 130 196 352 974 1880 
450 19 39 70 122 184 330 914 1770 
500 18 37 66 115 174 312 863 1670 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 


* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


255 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(20) 
POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(u)]* 


GAS: | NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 

NOMINAL OD: % % 1 1% 1% 2 3 4 
DESIGNATION: SDR 9.3 SDR t1 SDR 11 SDR 10 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.660 0.860 1.077 1.328 1.554 1.943 2.864 3.682 

LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 201 403 726 1260 1900 3410 9450 18 260 
20 138 277 499 865 1310 2350 6490 12 550 
30 111 222 401 695 1050 1880 5210 10 080 
40 95 190 343 594 898 1610 4460 8630 
50 84 169 304 527 796 1430 3950 7640 
60 76 153 276 477 721 1300 3580 6930 
70 70 140 254 439 663 1190 3300 6370 
80 65 131 236 409 617 1110 3070 5930 
90 61 123 221 383 579 1040 2880 5560 
100 58 116 209 362 547 983 2720 5250 
125 51 103 185 321 485 871 2410 4660 
150 46 93 168 291 439 789 2180 4220 
175 43 86 154 268 404 726 2010 3880 
200 40 80 144 249 376 675 1870 3610 
250 35 71 127 221 333 598 1660 3200 
300 32 64 115 200 302 542 1500 2900 
350 29 59 106 184 278 499 1380 2670 
400 27 55 99 171 258 464 1280 2480 
450 26 51 93 160 242 435 1200 2330 
500 24 48 88 152 229 411 1140 2200 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 mm/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, | inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


256 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(21) 
POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(v)]* 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL OD: D % 1 1% 1% 2 3 4 
DESIGNATION: SDR 9.3 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 10 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.660 0.860 1.077 1.328 1.554 1.943 2.864 3.682 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 1860 3720 6710 11 600 17 600 31 600 87 300 169 000 
20 1280 2560 4610 7990 12 100 21 700 60 000 116 000 
30 1030 2050 3710 6420 9690 17 400 48 200 93 200 
40 878 1760 3170 5490 8300 14 900 41 200 79 700 
50 778 1560 2810 4870 7350 13 200 36 600 70 700 
60 705 1410 2550 4410 6660 12 000 33 100 64 000 
70 649 1300 2340 4060 6130 11 000 30 500 58 900 
80 603 1210 2180 3780 5700 10 200 28 300 54 800 
90 566 1130 2050 3540 5350 9610 26 600 51 400 
100 535 1070 1930 3350 5050 9080 25 100 48 600 
125 474 949 1710 2970 4480 8050 22 300 43 000 
150 429 860 1550 2690 4060 7290 20 200 39 000 
175 395 791 1430 2470 3730 6710 18 600 35 900 
200 368 736 1330 2300 3470 6240 17 300 33 400 
250 326 652 1180 2040 3080 5530 15 300 29 600 
300 295 591 1070 1850 2790 5010 13 900 26 800 
350 272 544 981 1700 2570 4610 12 800 24 700 
400 253 506 913 1580 2390 4290 11 900 22 900 
450 237 475 856 1480 2240 4020 11 100 21 500 
500 224 448 809 1400 2120 3800 10 500 20 300 
550 213 426 768 1330 2010 3610 9990 19 300 
600 203 406 733 1270 1920 3440 9530 18 400 
650 194 389 702 1220 1840 3300 9130 17 600 
700 187 374 674 1170 1760 3170 8770 16 900 
750 180 360 649 1130 1700 3050 8450 16 300 
800 174 348 627 1090 1640 2950 8160 15 800 
850 168 336 607 1050 1590 2850 7890 15 300 
900 163 326 588 1020 1540 2770 7650 14 800 
950 158 317 572 990 1500 2690 7430 14 400 
1000 154 308 556 963 1450 2610 7230 14 000 
1100 146 293 528 915 1380 2480 6870 13 300 
1200 139 279 504 873 1320 2370 6550 12 700 
1300 134 267 482 836 1260 2270 6270 12 100 
1400 128 257 463 803 1210 2180 6030 11 600 
1500 124 247 446 773 1170 2100 5810 11 200 
1600 119 239 431 747 1130 2030 5610 10 800 
1700 115 231 417 723 1090 1960 5430 10 500 
1800 112 224 404 701 1060 1900 5260 10 200 
1900 109 218 393 680 1030 1850 5110 9900 
2000 106 212 382 662 1000 1800 4970 9600 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 0.0283 m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


257 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(22) 


POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.1(w)]? 3 


TABLE 1215.2(23) 


POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.2.100123 


GAS: |NATURAL GAS: |NATURAL 
INLET PRESSURE: |LESS THAN 2.0 psi INLET PRESSURE: | LESS THAN 2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 0.3 in. w.c. PRESSURE DROP: 0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: |0.60 SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 0.60 
PLASTIC TUBING SIZE (CTS)! (inch) PLASTIC TUBING SIZE (cTs)! (inch) 
NOMINAL OD: V 1 NOMINAL OD: Và 1 
DESIGNATION: SDR7 SDR 11 DESIGNATION: SDR7 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.445 0.927 ACTUAL ID: 0.445 0.927 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN CUBIC FEET OF GAS PER HOUR 
10 54 372 10 72 490 
20 37 256 20 49 337 
30 30 205 30 39 271 
40 26 176 40 34 232 
50 23 156 50 30 205 
60 21 141 60 27 186 
70 19 130 70 25 171 
80 18 121 80 23 159 
90 17 113 90 22 149 
100 16 107 100 21 141 
125 14 95 125 18 125 
150 13 86 150 17 113 
175 12 79 175 15 104 
200 11 74 200 14 97 
225 10 69 225 13 91 
250 NA 65 250 12 86 
275 NA 62 275 11 82 
300 МА 59 300 11 78 
350 МА 54 350 10 72 
400 NA 51 400 NA 67 
450 NA 47 450 NA 63 
500 NA 45 500 NA 59 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 
0.0283m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column 


— 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 


! CTS = Copper tube size. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 
5 NA means a flow of less than 10 f?/h (0.283 m?/h). 


258 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 cubic foot per hour = 


0.0283m?/h, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch water column 


= 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 


! CTS = Copper tube size. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 
5 NA means а flow of less than 10 ft*/h (0.283 m?/h). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(24) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(a)]* 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 10.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (HIGH PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND SECOND STAGE (LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
SIDE. VA 3A 1 % 1% 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1.610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
art CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 3320 6950 13 100 26 900 40 300 77 600 124 000 219 000 446 000 
20 2280 4780 9000 18 500 27 700 53 300 85 000 150 000 306 000 
30 1830 3840 7220 14 800 22 200 42 800 68 200 121 000 246 000 
40 1570 3280 6180 12 700 19 000 36 600 58 400 103 000 211 000 
50 1390 2910 5480 11 300 16 900 32 500 51 700 91 500 187 000 
60 1260 2640 4970 10 200 15 300 29 400 46 900 82 900 169 000 
70 1160 2430 4570 9380 14 100 27 100 43 100 76 300 156 000 
80 1080 2260 4250 8730 13 100 25 200 40 100 70 900 145 000 
90 1010 2120 3990 8190 12 300 23 600 37 700 66 600 136 000 
100 956 2000 3770 7730 11 600 22 300 35 600 62 900 128 000 
125 848 1770 3340 6850 10 300 19 800 31 500 55 700 114 000 
150 768 1610 3020 6210 9300 17 900 28 600 50 500 103 000 
175 706 1480 2780 5710 8560 16 500 26 300 46 500 94 700 
200 657 1370 2590 5320 7960 15 300 24 400 43 200 88 100 
250 582 1220 2290 4710 7060 13 600 21 700 38 300 78 100 
300 528 1100 2080 4270 6400 12 300 19 600 34 700 70 800 
350 486 1020 1910 3930 5880 11 300 18 100 31 900 65 100 
400 452 945 1780 3650 5470 10 500 16 800 29 700 60 600 
450 424 886 1670 3430 5140 9890 15 800 27 900 56 800 
500 400 837 1580 3240 4850 9340 14 900 26 300 53 700 
550 380 795 1500 3070 4610 8870 14 100 25 000 51 000 
600 363 759 1430 2930 4400 8460 13 500 23 900 48 600 
650 347 726 1370 2810 4210 8110 12 900 22 800 46 600 
700 334 698 1310 2700 4040 7790 12 400 21 900 44 800 
750 321 672 1270 2600 3900 7500 12 000 21100 43 100 
800 310 649 1220 2510 3760 7240 11 500 20 400 41 600 
850 300 628 1180 2430 3640 7010 11 200 19 800 40 300 
900 291 609 1150 2360 3530 6800 10 800 19 200 39 100 
950 283 592 1110 2290 3430 6600 10 500 18 600 37 900 
1000 215 575 1080 2230 3330 6420 10 200 18 100 36 900 
1100 261 546 1030 2110 3170 6100 9720 17 200 35 000 
1200 249 521 982 2020 3020 5820 9270 16 400 33 400 
1300 239 499 940 1930 2890 5570 8880 15 700 32 000 
1400 229 480 903 1850 2780 5350 8530 15 100 30 800 
1500 221 462 870 1790 2680 5160 8220 14 500 29 600 
1600 213 446 840 1730 2590 4980 7940 14 000 28 600 
1700 206 432 813 1670 2500 4820 7680 13 600 27 700 
1800 200 419 789 1620 2430 4670 7450 13 200 26 900 
1900 194 407 766 1570 2360 4540 7230 12 800 26 100 
2000 189 395 745 1530 2290 4410 7030 12 400 25 400 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 259 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(25) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(b)]* 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 10.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: 3.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (HIGH PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND SECOND STAGE (LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
ee Ys % 1 1% 1» 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
pes CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 5890 12 300 23 200 47 600 71300 137 000 219 000 387 000 789 000 
20 4050 8460 15 900 32 700 49 000 94 400 150 000 266 000 543 000 
30 3250 6790 12 800 26 300 39 400 75 800 121 000 214 000 436 000 
40 2780 5810 11 000 22 500 33 700 64 900 103 000 183 000 373 000 
50 2460 5150 9710 19 900 29 900 57 500 91 600 162 000 330 000 
60 2230 4670 8790 18 100 27 100 52 100 83 000 147 000 299 000 
70 2050 4300 8090 16 600 24 900 47 900 76 400 135 000 275 000 
80 1910 4000 7530 15 500 23 200 44 600 71 100 126 000 256 000 
90 1790 3750 7060 14 500 21 700 41 800 66 700 118 000 240 000 
100 1690 3540 6670 13 700 20 500 39 500 63 000 111 000 227 000 
125 1500 3140 5910 12 100 18 200 35 000 55 800 98 700 201 000 
150 1360 2840 5360 11 000 16 500 31 700 50 600 89 400 182 000 
175 1250 2620 4930 10 100 15 200 29 200 46 500 82 300 167 800 
200 1160 2430 4580 9410 14 100 27 200 43 300 76 500 156 100 
250 1030 2160 4060 8340 12 500 24 100 38 400 67 800 138 400 
300 935 1950 3680 7560 11 300 21 800 34 800 61 500 125 400 
350 860 1800 3390 6950 10 400 20 100 32 000 56 500 115 300 
400 800 1670 3150 6470 9690 18 700 29 800 52 600 107 300 
450 751 1570 2960 6070 9090 17 500 27 900 49 400 100 700 
500 709 1480 2790 5730 8590 16 500 26 400 46 600 95 100 
550 673 1410 2650 5450 8160 15 700 25 000 44 300 90 300 
600 642 1340 2530 5200 7780 15 000 23 900 42 200 86 200 
650 615 1290 2420 4980 7450 14 400 22 900 40 500 82 500 
700 591 1240 2330 4780 7160 13 800 22 000 38 900 79 300 
750 569 1190 2240 4600 6900 13 300 21 200 37 400 76 400 
800 550 1150 2170 4450 6660 12 800 20 500 36 200 73 700 
850 532 1110 2100 4300 6450 12 400 19 800 35 000 71 400 
900 516 1080 2030 4170 6250 12 000 19 200 33 900 69 200 
950 501 1050 1970 4050 6070 11 700 18 600 32 900 67 200 
1000 487 1020 1920 3940 5900 11 400 18 100 32 000 65 400 
1100 463 968 1820 3740 5610 10 800 17 200 30 400 62 100 
1200 442 923 1740 3570 5350 10 300 16 400 29 000 59 200 
1300 423 884 1670 3420 5120 9870 15 700 27 800 56 700 
1400 406 849 1600 3280 4920 9480 15 100 26 700 54 500 
1500 391 818 1540 3160 4740 9130 14 600 25 700 52 500 
1600 378 790 1490 3060 4580 8820 14 100 24 800 50 700 
1700 366 765 1440 2960 4430 8530 13 600 24 000 49 000 
1800 355 741 1400 2870 4300 8270 13 200 23 300 47 600 
1900 344 720 1360 2780 4170 8040 12 800 22 600 46 200 
2000 335 700 1320 2710 4060 7820 12 500 22 000 44 900 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


260 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(26) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(c)]* 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL: 1 34 1 1% 1^ 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL ID: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1.610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
pov CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 2680 5590 10 500 21 600 32 400 62 400 99 500 176 000 359 000 
20 1840 3850 7240 14 900 22 300 42 900 68 400 121 000 247 000 
30 1480 3090 5820 11 900 17 900 34 500 54 900 97 100 198 000 
40 1260 2640 4980 10 200 15 300 29 500 47 000 83 100 170 000 
50 1120 2340 4410 9060 13 600 26 100 41 700 73 700 150 000 
60 1010 2120 4000 8210 12 300 23 700 37 700 66 700 136 000 
70 934 1950 3680 7550 11 300 21 800 34 700 61 400 125 000 
80 869 1820 3420 7020 10 500 20 300 32 300 57 100 116 000 
90 815 1700 3210 6590 9880 19 000 30 300 53 600 109 000 
100 770 1610 3030 6230 9330 18 000 28 600 50 600 103 000 
125 682 1430 2690 5520 8270 15 900 25 400 44 900 91 500 
150 618 1290 2440 5000 7490 14 400 23 000 40 700 82 900 
175 569 1190 2240 4600 6890 13 300 21200 37 400 76 300 
200 529 1110 2080 4280 6410 12 300 19 700 34 800 71 000 
250 469 981 1850 3790 5680 10 900 17 400 30 800 62 900 
300 425 889 1670 3440 5150 9920 15 800 27 900 57 000 
350 391 817 1540 3160 4740 9120 14 500 25 700 52 400 
400 364 760 1430 2940 4410 8490 13 500 23 900 48 800 
450 341 714 1340 2760 4130 7960 12 700 22 400 45 800 
500 322 674 1270 2610 3910 7520 12 000 21200 43 200 
550 306 640 1210 2480 3710 7140 11 400 20 100 41 100 
600 292 611 1150 2360 3540 6820 10 900 19 200 39 200 
650 280 585 1100 2260 3390 6530 10 400 18 400 37 500 
700 269 562 1060 2170 3260 6270 9990 17 700 36 000 
750 259 541 1020 2090 3140 6040 9630 17 000 34 700 
800 250 523 985 2020 3030 5830 9300 16 400 33 500 
850 242 506 953 1960 2930 5640 9000 15 900 32 400 
900 235 490 924 1900 2840 5470 8720 15 400 31 500 
950 228 476 897 1840 2760 5310 8470 15 000 30 500 
1000 222 463 873 1790 2680 5170 8240 14 600 29 700 
1100 210 440 829 1700 2550 4910 7830 13 800 28 200 
1200 201 420 791 1620 2430 4680 7470 13 200 26 900 
1300 192 402 751 1550 2330 4490 7150 12 600 25 800 
1400 185 386 727 1490 2240 4310 6870 12 100 24 800 
1500 178 372 701 1440 2160 4150 6620 11 700 23 900 
1600 172 359 677 1390 2080 4010 6390 11 300 23 000 
1700 166 348 655 1340 2010 3880 6180 10 900 22 300 
1800 161 337 635 1300 1950 3760 6000 10 600 21 600 
1900 157 327 617 1270 1900 3650 5820 10 300 21 000 
2000 152 318 600 1230 1840 3550 5660 10 000 20 400 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 261 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(27) 
SCHEDULE 40 METALLIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(d)]* 


GAS: |UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: 110 in. w.c. 
PRESSURE DROP: |0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: PIPE SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE- OR SECOND-STAGE (LOW-PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND APPLIANCE 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
Mee: % % 1 1% 1% 2 2% 3 4 
ACTUAL: 0.622 0.824 1.049 1.380 1610 2.067 2.469 3.068 4.026 
po გ CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 291 608 1150 2350 3520 6790 10 800 19 100 39 000 
20 200 418 787 1620 2420 4660 7430 13 100 26 800 
30 160 336 632 1300 1940 3750 5970 10 600 21 500 
40 137 287 541 1110 1660 3210 5110 9030 18 400 
50 122 255 480 985 1480 2840 4530 8000 16 300 
60 110 231 434 892 1340 2570 4100 7250 14 800 
70 101 212 400 821 1230 2370 3770 6670 13 600 
80 94 197 372 763 1140 2200 3510 6210 12 700 
90 89 185 349 716 1070 2070 3290 5820 11 900 
100 84 175 330 677 1010 1950 3110 5500 11 200 
125 74 155 292 600 899 1730 2760 4880 9950 
150 67 140 265 543 814 1570 2500 4420 9010 
175 62 129 243 500 749 1440 2300 4060 8290 
200 58 120 227 465 697 1340 2140 3780 7710 
250 51 107 201 412 618 1190 1900 3350 6840 
300 46 97 182 373 560 1080 1720 3040 6190 
350 42 89 167 344 515 991 1580 2790 5700 
400 40 83 156 320 479 922 1470 2600 5300 
450 37 78 146 300 449 865 1380 2440 4970 
500 35 B 138 283 424 817 1300 2300 4700 
550 33 70 131 269 403 776 1240 2190 4460 
600 32 66 125 257 385 741 1180 2090 4260 
650 30 64 120 246 368 709 1130 2000 4080 
700 29 61 115 236 354 681 1090 1920 3920 
750 28 59 111 227 341 656 1050 1850 3770 
800 27 57 107 220 329 634 1010 1790 3640 
850 26 55 104 213 319 613 978 1730 3530 
900 25 53 100 206 309 595 948 1680 3420 
950 25 52 97 200 300 578 921 1630 3320 
1000 24 50 95 195 292 562 895 1580 3230 
1100 23 48 90 185 277 534 850 1500 3070 
1200 22 46 86 176 264 509 811 1430 2930 
1300 21 44 82 169 253 487 777 1370 2800 
1400 20 42 79 162 243 468 746 1320 2690 
1500 19 40 76 156 234 451 719 1270 2590 
1600 19 39 74 151 226 436 694 1230 2500 
1700 18 38 71 146 219 422 672 1190 2420 
1800 18 37 69 142 212 409 652 1150 2350 
1900 17 36 67 138 206 397 633 1120 2280 
2000 17 35 65 134 200 386 615 1090 2220 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


262 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(28) 


SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(e)]? 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


GAS: 


UNDILUTED PROPANE 


INLET PRESSURE: 


10.0 psi 


PRESSURE DROP: 


1.0 psi 


SPECIFIC GRAVITY: 


1.50 


INTENDED USE: TUBE SIZING BETWEEN FIRST STAGE (HIGH PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND SECOND STAGE (LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR 


TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: V 35 VA % 3A 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: 36 % % % % 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE: 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 513 1060 2150 3760 5330 11400 20 500 32 300 67 400 
20 352 727 1480 2580 3670 7830 14 100 22 200 46 300 
30 283 584 1190 2080 2940 6290 11 300 17 900 37 200 
40 242 500 1020 1780 2520 5380 9690 15 300 31 800 
50 215 443 901 1570 2230 4770 8590 13 500 28 200 
60 194 401 816 1430 2020 4320 7780 12 300 25 600 
70 179 369 751 1310 1860 3980 7160 11 300 23 500 
80 166 343 699 1220 1730 3700 6660 10 500 21 900 
90 156 322 655 1150 1630 3470 6250 9850 20 500 
100 147 304 619 1080 1540 3280 5900 9310 19 400 
125 131 270 549 959 1360 2910 5230 8250 17 200 
150 118 244 497 869 1230 2630 4740 7470 15 600 
175 109 225 457 799 1130 2420 4360 6880 14 300 
200 101 209 426 744 1060 2250 4060 6400 13 300 
250 90 185 377 659 935 2000 3600 5670 11 800 
300 81 168 342 597 847 1810 3260 5140 10 700 
350 75 155 314 549 779 1660 3000 4730 9840 
400 70 144 292 511 725 1550 2790 4400 9160 
450 65 135 274 480 680 1450 2620 4130 8590 
500 62 127 259 453 643 1370 2470 3900 8120 
550 59 121 246 430 610 1300 2350 3700 7710 
600 56 115 235 410 582 1240 2240 3530 7350 
650 54 111 225 393 558 1190 2140 3380 7040 
700 51 106 216 378 536 1140 2060 3250 6770 
750 50 102 208 364 516 1100 1980 3130 6520 
800 48 99 201 351 498 1060 1920 3020 6290 
850 46 96 195 340 482 1030 1850 2920 6090 
900 45 93 189 330 468 1000 1800 2840 5910 
950 44 90 183 320 454 970 1750 2750 5730 
1000 42 88 178 311 442 944 1700 2680 5580 
1100 40 83 169 296 420 896 1610 2540 5300 
1200 38 79 161 282 400 855 1540 2430 5050 
1300 37 76 155 270 383 819 1470 2320 4840 
1400 35 73 148 260 368 787 1420 2230 4650 
1500 34 70 143 250 355 758 1360 2150 4480 
1600 33 68 138 241 343 732 1320 2080 4330 
1700 32 66 134 234 331 708 1270 2010 4190 
1800 3] 64 130 227 321 687 1240 1950 4060 
1900 30 62 126 220 312 667 1200 1890 3940 
2000 29 60 122 214 304 648 1170 1840 3830 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 


Notes: 


! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smal 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


est inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


263 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(29) 
SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1()]2 3 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 11.0 in. w.c. 
PRESSURE DROP: |0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: TUBE SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE OR SECOND STAGE (LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND APPLIANCE 
TUBE SIZE (inch) 
K&L: % % % % % 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 
ACR: % % % % % 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE:! 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 45 93 188 329 467 997 1800 2830 5890 
20 31 64 129 226 321 685 1230 1950 4050 
30 25 51 104 182 258 550 991 1560 3250 
40 21 44 89 155 220 471 848 1340 2780 
50 19 39 79 138 195 417 752 1180 2470 
60 17 35 71 125 177 378 681 1070 2240 
70 16 32 66 115 163 348 626 988 2060 
80 15 30 61 107 152 324 583 919 1910 
90 14 28 57 100 142 304 547 862 1800 
100 13 27 54 95 134 287 517 814 1700 
125 11 24 48 84 119 254 458 722 1500 
150 10 21 44 76 108 230 415 654 1360 
175 NA 20 40 70 99 212 382 602 1250 
200 NA 18 37 65 92 197 355 560 1170 
250 NA 16 33 58 82 175 315 496 1030 
300 NA 15 30 52 74 158 285 449 936 
350 NA 14 28 48 68 146 262 414 861 
400 NA 13 26 45 63 136 244 385 801 
450 NA 12 24 42 60 127 229 361 752 
500 NA 11 23 40 56 120 216 341 710 
550 NA 11 22 38 53 114 205 324 674 
600 NA 10 21 36 51 109 196 309 643 
650 NA NA 20 34 49 104 188 296 616 
700 NA NA 19 33 47 100 180 284 592 
750 NA NA 18 32 45 96 174 274 570 
800 NA NA 18 31 44 93 168 264 551 
850 NA NA 17 30 42 90 162 256 533 
900 NA NA 17 29 41 87 157 248 517 
950 NA NA 16 28 40 85 153 241 502 
1000 NA NA 16 27 39 83 149 234 488 
1100 NA NA 15 26 37 78 141 223 464 
1200 NA NA 14 25 35 75 135 212 442 
1300 МА МА 14 24 34 72 129 203 423 
1400 NA NA 13 23 32 69 124 195 407 
1500 NA NA 13 22 3l 66 119 188 392 
1600 NA NA 12 21 30 64 115 182 378 
1700 NA NA 12 20 29 62 112 176 366 
1800 NA NA 11 20 28 60 108 170 355 
1900 NA NA 11 19 27 58 105 166 345 
2000 NA NA 11 19 27 57 102 161 335 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 
! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the smallest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 
? NA means a flow of less than 10 000 Btu/h (2.93 kW). 


264 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(30) 


SEMI-RIGID COPPER TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(g)]2 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


GAS: 


UNDILUTED PROPANE 


INLET PRESSURE: 


2.0 psi 


PRESSURE DROP: 


1.0 psi 


SPECIFIC GRAVITY: 


1.50 


INTENDED USE: TUBE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE AND L 


INE PRESSURE REGULATOR 


TUBE SIZE (inch) 


K&L: % 36 % % 34 1 1% 1% 2 
NOMINAL: 

ACR: 35 1 5s 34 V 1% 1% - - 
OUTSIDE: 0.375 0.500 0.625 0.750 0.875 1.125 1.375 1.625 2.125 
INSIDE: 0.305 0.402 0.527 0.652 0.745 0.995 1.245 1.481 1.959 

LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 413 852 1730 3030 4300 9170 16 500 26 000 54 200 
20 284 585 1190 2080 2950 6310 11 400 17 900 37 300 
30 228 470 956 1670 2370 5060 9120 14 400 29 900 
40 195 402 818 1430 2030 4330 7800 12 300 25 600 
50 173 356 725 1270 1800 3840 6920 10 900 22 700 
60 157 323 657 1150 1630 3480 6270 9880 20 600 
70 144 297 605 1060 1500 3200 5760 9090 18 900 
80 134 276 562 983 1390 2980 5360 8450 17 600 
90 126 259 528 922 1310 2790 5030 7930 16 500 
100 119 245 498 871 1240 2640 4750 7490 15 600 
125 105 217 442 772 1100 2340 4210 6640 13 800 
150 95 197 400 700 992 2120 3820 6020 12 500 
175 88 181 368 644 913 1950 3510 5540 11 500 
200 82 168 343 599 849 1810 3270 5150 10 700 
250 72 149 304 531 753 1610 2900 4560 9510 
300 66 135 275 481 682 1460 2620 4140 8610 
350 60 124 253 442 628 1340 2410 3800 7920 
400 56 116 235 411 584 1250 2250 3540 7370 
450 53 109 221 386 548 1170 2110 3320 6920 
500 50 103 209 365 517 1110 1990 3140 6530 
550 47 97 198 346 491 1050 1890 2980 6210 
600 45 93 189 330 469 1000 1800 2840 5920 
650 43 89 181 316 449 959 1730 2720 5670 
700 41 86 174 304 431 921 1660 2620 5450 
750 40 82 168 293 415 888 1600 2520 5250 
800 39 80 162 283 401 857 1540 2430 5070 
850 37 77 157 274 388 829 1490 2350 4900 
900 36 75 152 265 376 804 1450 2280 4750 
950 35 72 147 258 366 781 1410 2220 4620 
1000 34 71 143 251 356 760 1370 2160 4490 
1100 32 67 136 238 338 721 1300 2050 4270 
1200 3] 64 130 227 322 688 1240 1950 4070 
1300 30 61 124 217 309 659 1190 1870 3900 
1400 28 59 120 209 296 633 1140 1800 3740 
1500 27 57 115 201 286 610 1100 1730 3610 
1600 26 55 111 194 276 589 1060 1670 3480 
1700 26 53 108 188 267 570 1030 1620 3370 
1800 25 51 104 182 259 553 1000 1570 3270 
1900 24 50 101 177 251 537 966 1520 3170 
2000 23 48 99 172 244 522 940 1480 3090 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 


Notes: 


! Table capacities are based on Type K copper tubing inside diameter (shown), which has the sma 
? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


lest inside diameter of the copper tubing products. 


265 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(31) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(1)]' 2 


GAS: UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 11.0 in. w.c. 
PRESSURE DROP: |0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: CSST SIZING BETWEEN SINGLE OR SECOND STAGE (LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND APPLIANCE SHUTOFF VALVE 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION:| 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
5 72 99 | 181 | 211 355 426 744 863 1420 1638 2830 3270 5780 6550 
10 50 69 | 129 | 150 254 303 521 605 971 1179 1990 2320 4110 4640 
15 39 55 | 104 | 121 208 248 422 490 775 972 1620 1900 3370 3790 
20 34 49 91 106 183 216 365 425 661 847 1400 1650 2930 3290 
25 30 42 82 94 164 192 325 379 583 762 1250 1480 2630 2940 
30 28 39 74 87 151 177 297 344 528 698 1140 1350 2400 2680 
40 23 33 64 74 131 153 256 297 449 610 988 1170 2090 2330 
50 20 30 58 66 118 137 227 265 397 548 884 1050 1870 2080 
60 19 26 53 60 107 126 207 241 359 502 805 961 1710 1900 
70 17 25 49 57 99 117 191 222 330 466 745 890 1590 1760 
80 15 23 45 52 94 109 178 208 307 438 696 833 1490 1650 
90 15 22 44 50 90 102 169 197 286 414 656 787 1400 1550 
100 14 20 4] 47 85 98 159 186 270 393 621 746 1330 1480 
150 11 15 31 36 66 75 123 143 217 324 506 611 1090 1210 
200 9 14 28 33 60 69 112 129 183 283 438 531 948 1050 
250 8 12 25 30 53 61 99 117 163 254 390 476 850 934 
300 8 11 23 26 50 57 90 107 147 234 357 434 777 854 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
Notes: 


! Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by 


an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


EHD - Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


266 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(32) 
CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(1)]' 2,3,4 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: | 1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: CSST SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSIG SERVICE AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION:| 13 | 15 | 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

10 426 | 558 | 927 | 1110 | 1740 | 2170 | 4100 4720 7130 | 7958 | 15200 | 16 800 | 29400 | 34 200 
25 262 | 347 | 591 | 701 1120 | 1380 | 2560 2950 4560 | 5147 9550 10 700 | 18800 | 21 700 
30 238 | 316 | 540 | 640 | 1030 | 1270 | 2330 2690 4180 | 4719 8710 9790 17200 | 19 800 
40 203 | 271 | 469 | 554 896 | 1100 | 2010 2320 3630 | 4116 7530 8500 14900 | 17200 
50 181 | 243 | 420 | 496 806 986 | 1790 2070 3260 | 3702 6730 7610 13 400 | 15 400 
75 147 | 196 | 344 | 406 663 809 | 1460 1690 2680 | 3053 5480 6230 11000 | 12600 
80 140 | 189 | 333 | 393 643 768 | 1410 1630 2590 | 2961 5300 6040 10600 | 12 200 
100 124 | 169 | 298 | 350 578 703 | 1260 1450 2330 | 2662 4740 5410 9530 10 900 
150 101 | 137 | 245 | 287 4T] 575 | 1020 1180 1910 | 2195 3860 4430 7810 8890 
200 86 |118 | 213 | 248 415 501 880 1020 1660 1915 3340 3840 6780 7710 
250 77 | 105 | 191 | 222 373 448 785 910 1490 1722 2980 3440 6080 6900 
300 69 96 | 173 | 203 343 411 716 829 1360 1578 2720 3150 5560 6300 
400 60 82 | 151 175 298 355 616 716 1160 1376 2350 2730 4830 5460 
500 53 72 | 135 | 158 268 319 550 638 1030 1237 2100 2450 4330 4880 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
Notes: 


! Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 0.5 psi (3.4 kPa) [based on 13 inch water column (3.2 


kPa) outlet pressure], DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across a reg- 
ulator are capable of varying with flow rate. 


N 


CAUTION: Capacities shown in table are capable of exceeding the maximum capacity for a selected regulator. Consult with regulator or tubing manufacturer 
for guidance. 
Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased by 


an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 
or both. 


Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 267 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(33) 


CORRUGATED STAINLESS STEEL TUBING (CSST) [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(j)] ? 3,4 


GAS:| UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: 5.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP:|3.5 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: 1.50 
TUBE SIZE (EHD)? 
FLOW DESIGNATION: | 13 15 18 19 23 25 30 31 37 39 46 48 60 62 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 

10 826 | 1070 | 1710 | 2060 | 3150 | 4000 | 7830 | 8950 | 13 100 | 14441 | 28600 | 31200 | 54400 | 63 800 
25 509 | 664 | 1090 | 1310 | 2040 | 2550 | 4860 | 5600 | 8400 9339 18000 | 19900 | 34700 | 40 400 
30 461 | 603 999 | 1190 | 1870 | 2340 | 4430 | 5100 | 7680 8564 16400 | 18200 | 31700 | 36900 
40 396 | 520 867 | 1030 | 1630 | 2030 | 3820 | 4400 | 6680 7469 14200 | 15800 | 27600 | 32 000 
50 352 | 463 777 926 | 1460 | 1820 | 3410 | 3930 | 5990 6717 12700 | 14100 | 24700 | 28 600 
75 284 | 376 637 757 | 1210 | 1490 | 2770 | 3190 | 4920 5539 10300 | 11600 | 20300 | 23 400 
80 275 | 363 618 731 1170 | 1450 | 2680 | 3090 | 4770 5372 9990 11 200 19600 | 22 700 
100 243 | 324 553 656 | 1050 | 1300 | 2390 | 2760 | 4280 4830 8930 10 000 17600 | 20300 
150 196 | 262 453 535 866 | 1060 | 1940 | 2240 | 3510 3983 7270 8210 14400 | 16600 
200 169 | 226 393 464 755 923 | 1680 | 1930 | 3050 3474 6290 7130 12500 | 14400 
250 150 | 202 352 415 679 828 | 1490 | 1730 | 2740 3124 5620 6390 11200 | 12900 
300 136 | 183 322 379 622 757 | 1360 | 1570 | 2510 2865 5120 5840 10300 | 11 700 
400 117 | 158 279 328 542 657 | 1170 | 1360 | 2180 2498 4430 5070 8920 10 200 
500 104 | 140 251 294 488 589 | 1050 | 1210 | 1950 2247 3960 4540 8000 9110 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


1 


Table does not include effect of pressure drop across the line regulator. Where regulator loss exceeds 0.5 psi (3.4 kPa) [based on 13 inch water column (3.2 


kPa) outlet pressure], DO NOT USE THIS TABLE. Consult with regulator manufacturer for pressure drops and capacity factors. Pressure drops across a reg- 
ulator are capable of varying with flow rate. 


CAUTION: Capacities shown in table are capable of exceeding the maximum capacity for a selected regulator. Consult with regulator or tubing manufacturer 


for guidance. 


Table includes losses for four 90 degree (1.57 rad) bends and two end fittings. Tubing runs with larger numbers of bends, fittings, or both shall be increased 
by an equivalent length of tubing to the following equation: L = 1.3 n, where L is additional length (ft) of tubing and n is the number of additional fittings, bends, 


or both. 


Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


EHD = Equivalent Hydraulic Diameter, which is a measure of the relative hydraulic efficiency between different tubing sizes. The greater the value of EHD, 
the greater the gas capacity of the tubing. 


268 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(34) 
POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(k)]* 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 


INLET PRESSURE: | 11.0 in. w.c. 


PRESSURE DROP: 0.5 in. w.c. 


SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 


INTENDED USE: PE PIPE SIZING BETWEEN INTEGRAL SECOND-STAGE REGULATOR AT TANK OR SECOND-STAGE 
(LOW PRESSURE) REGULATOR AND BUILDING 


PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL OD: D 7 1 тА 1% 2 3 4 
DESIGNATION: SDR 9.3 SDR t1 SDR t1 SDR 10 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.660 0.860 1.077 1.328 1.554 1.943 2.864 3.682 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 340 680 1230 2130 3210 5770 16 000 30 900 
20 233 468 844 1460 2210 3970 11 000 21 200 
30 187 375 677 1170 1770 3180 8810 17 000 
40 160 321 580 1000 1520 2730 7540 14 600 
50 142 285 514 890 1340 2420 6680 12 900 
60 129 258 466 807 1220 2190 6050 11 700 
70 119 237 428 742 1120 2010 5570 10 800 
80 110 221 398 690 1040 1870 5180 10 000 
90 103 207 374 648 978 1760 4860 9400 
100 98 196 353 612 924 1660 4590 8900 
125 87 173 313 542 819 1470 4070 7900 
150 78 157 284 491 742 1330 3690 7130 
175 72 145 261 452 683 1230 3390 6560 
200 67 135 243 420 635 1140 3160 6100 
250 60 119 215 373 563 1010 2800 5410 
300 54 108 195 338 510 916 2530 4900 
350 50 99 179 311 469 843 2330 4510 
400 46 92 167 289 436 784 2170 4190 
450 43 87 157 271 409 736 2040 3930 
500 41 82 148 256 387 695 1920 3720 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 269 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


TABLE 1215.2(35) 
POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC PIPE [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(I)]* 


GAS: |UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: |2.0 psi 
PRESSURE DROP: |1.0 psi 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: PE PIPE SIZING BETWEEN 2 PSI SERVICE REGULATOR AND LINE PRESSURE REGULATOR 
PIPE SIZE (inch) 
NOMINAL OD: D % 1 тА 1% 2 3 4 
DESIGNATION: SDR 9.3 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 10 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.660 0.860 1.077 1.328 1.554 1.943 2.864 3.682 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 3130 6260 11 300 19 600 29 500 53 100 147 000 284 000 
20 2150 4300 7760 13 400 20 300 36 500 101 000 195 000 
30 1730 3450 6230 10 800 16 300 29 300 81 100 157 000 
40 1480 2960 5330 9240 14 000 25 100 69 400 134 100 
50 1310 2620 4730 8190 12 400 22 200 61 500 119 000 
60 1190 2370 4280 7420 11 200 20 100 55 700 108 000 
70 1090 2180 3940 6830 10 300 18 500 51 300 99 100 
80 1010 2030 3670 6350 9590 17 200 47 700 92 200 
90 952 1910 3440 5960 9000 16 200 44 700 86 500 
100 899 1800 3250 5630 8500 15 300 42 300 81 700 
125 797] 1600 2880 4990 7530 13 500 37 500 72 400 
150 722 1450 2610 4520 6830 12 300 33 900 65 600 
175 664 1330 2400 4160 6280 11 300 31 200 60 300 
200 618 1240 2230 3870 5840 10 500 29 000 56 100 
250 548 1100 1980 3430 5180 9300 25 700 49 800 
300 496 994 1790 3110 4690 8430 23 300 45 100 
350 457 914 1650 2860 4320 7760 21 500 41 500 
400 425 851 1530 2660 4020 7220 12 000 38 600 
450 399 798 1440 2500 3770 6770 18 700 36 200 
500 377 754 1360 2360 3560 6390 17 700 34 200 
550 358 716 1290 2240 3380 6070 16 800 32 500 
600 341 683 1230 2140 3220 5790 16 000 31 000 
650 327 654 1180 2040 3090 5550 15 400 29 700 
700 314 628 1130 1960 2970 5330 14 700 28 500 
750 302 605 1090 1890 2860 5140 14 200 27 500 
800 292 585 1050 1830 2760 4960 13 700 26 500 
850 283 566 1020 1770 2670 4800 13 300 25 700 
900 274 549 990 1710 2590 4650 12 900 24 900 
950 266 533 961 1670 2520 4520 12 500 24 200 
1000 259 518 935 1620 2450 4400 12 200 23 500 
1100 246 492 888 1540 2320 4170 11 500 22 300 
1200 234 470 847 1470 2220 3980 11 000 21 300 
1300 225 450 811 1410 2120 3810 10 600 20 400 
1400 216 432 779 1350 2040 3660 10 100 19 600 
1500 208 416 751 1300 1960 3530 9760 18 900 
1600 201 402 725 1260 1900 3410 9430 18 200 
1700 194 389 702 1220 1840 3300 9130 17 600 
1800 188 377 680 1180 1780 3200 8850 17 100 
1900 183 366 661 1140 1730 3110 8590 16 600 
2000 178 356 643 1110 1680 3020 8360 16 200 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 
* Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


270 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1215.2(36) 


POLYETHYLENE PLASTIC TUBING [NFPA 54: TABLE 6.3.1(т)]2 


GAS: | UNDILUTED PROPANE 
INLET PRESSURE: | 11.0 in. w.c. 
PRESSURE DROP: [0.5 in. w.c. 
SPECIFIC GRAVITY: | 1.50 
INTENDED USE: SIZING BETWEEN INTEGRAL 
2-STAGE REGULATOR AT TANK OR SECOND-STAGE 
(LOW-PRESSURE REGULATOR) AND THE BUILDING 
PLASTIC TUBING SIZE (CTS)! (inch) 
NOMINAL OD: % 1 
DESIGNATION: SDR7 SDR 11 
ACTUAL ID: 0.445 0.927 
LENGTH (feet) CAPACITY IN THOUSANDS OF BTU PER HOUR 
10 121 828 
20 83 569 
30 67 457 
40 57 391 
50 51 347 
60 46 314 
70 42 289 
80 39 269 
90 37 252 
100 35 238 
125 31 211 
150 28 191 
175 26 176 
200 24 164 
225 22 154 
250 21 145 
275 20 138 
300 19 132 
350 18 121 
400 16 113 
450 15 106 
500 15 100 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per 
hour = 0.293 kW, 1 inch water column = 0.249 kPa 


Notes: 
! CTS = Copper tube size. 


? Table entries are rounded to 3 significant digits. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FUEL GAS PIPING 


271 


272 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 13 - HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 2 | 1-AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 192 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX XXIX X 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 
Chapter/Section 
1304.1.1 X XIXIX XX 
1304.1.2 X XIXIX XX 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 273 


274 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 13 
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


Part | - General Requirements. 


1301.0 General Requirements. 


1301.1 Applicability. This chapter applies to the special fix- 

tures and systems in health care facilities; the special plumb- 

ing requirements for such facilities; and the installation, 

testing, and verification of Categories 1, 2, and 3 medical gas 

and medical vacuum piping systems, except as otherwise indi- 

cated in this chapter, from the central supply system to the sta- 

tion outlets or inlets in hospitals, clinics, and other health care 

facilities. Other plumbing in such facilities shall comply with 

other applicable sections of this code. For Category 3 medical 

gas systems, only oxygen and nitrous oxide shall be used. 

1301.2 Where Not Applicable. This chapter does not apply 

to the following except as otherwise addressed in this chapter: 

(1) Cylinder and container management, storage, and reserve 

requirements 

(2) Bulk supply systems 

(3) Electrical connections and requirements 

(4) Motor requirements and controls 

(5) Systems having nonstandard operating pressures 

(6) Waste anesthetic gas disposal (WAGD) systems 

(7) Surface-mounted medical gas rail systems 

(8) Breathing air replenishment (BAR) systems 

(9) Portable compressed gas systems 

(10) Medical support gas systems 

(11) Gas-powered device supply systems 

(12) Scavenging systems 

1301.3 Conflict of Requirements. The requirements of 

this chapter shall not be interpreted to conflict with the 

requirements of NFPA 99. For requirements of portions of 

medical gas and vacuum systems not addressed in this chap- 

ter or medical gas and vacuum systems beyond the scope of 

this chapter refer to NFPA 99. 

1301.4 Where Required. Construction and equipment 

requirements shall be applied only to new construction and 

new equipment, except as modified in individual sections of 
| this chapter. {NFPA 99:1.3.2} 

1301.5 Existing Systems. Only the altered, renovated, or 

modernized portion of an existing system or individual com- 

ponent shall be required to meet the installation and equip- 

ment requirements stated in this code. If the alteration, 

renovation, or modernization adversely impacts the existing 

performance requirements of a system or component, addi- 

tional upgrading shall be required. An existing system that is 

not in strict compliance with the provisions of this code shall 

be permitted to be continued in use, unless the Authority Hav- 


ing Jurisdiction has determined that such use constitutes a dis- 
tinct hazard to life. [NFPA 99:1.3.2.1 — 1.3.2.3] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1302.0 Design Requirements. 
1302.1 Risk Categories. All activities, as well as systems 
or equipment that are new or altered, shall be designed to 
meet Category | through Category 4 requirements, as detailed 
in this chapter. {NFPA 99:4.1} 
1302.1.1 Processes and Operations. The health 
care facility’s governing body shall establish the 
processes and operations that are planned for the health 
care facility. [NFPA 99:4.2.1] 
1302.1.1.1 Risk Categories. The governing body 
shall conduct risk assessments and shall determine 
risk categories based on the character of the 
processes and operations conducted in the health 
care facility. [NFPA 99:4.2.1.1] 
1302.1.2 Risk Assessment. Risk categories shall be 
classified by the health care facility’s governing body by 
following and documenting a defined risk assessment 
procedure. [NFPA 99:4.2.2] 
1302.1.2.1 Documents to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. Where required by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction (AHJ), the risk assessment 
shall be provided to the AHJ for review based on the 
character of the processes and operations conducted 
in the health care facility. [NFPA 99:4.2.2.1] 
1302.1.3 Documented Risk Assessment. A docu- 
mented risk assessment shall not be required where Cat- 
egory 1 is selected. [NFPA 99:4.2.3] 
1302.2 Patient Care Spaces. The health care facility's 
governing body or its designee shall establish the following 
areas in accordance with the type of patient care anticipated 
(see definition of patient care space in Chapter 2): 
(1) Category 1 spaces 
(2) Category 2 spaces 
(3) Category 3 spaces 
(4) Category 4 spaces [NFPA 99:1.3.4.1] 
1302.3 Anesthesia. It shall be the responsibility of the 
health care facility's governing body to designate anesthetiz- 
ing locations. [NFPA 99:1.3.4.2] 
1302.4 Wet Procedure Locations. It shall be the respon- 
sibility of the health care facility's governing body to desig- 
nate wet procedure locations. [NFPA 99:1.3.4.3] 


1303.0 Health Care Facilities. 

1303.1 Drinking Fountain Control Valves. Drinking 
fountain control valves shall be flush-mounted or fully 
recessed where installed in corridors or other areas where 
patients are transported on a gurney, bed, or wheelchair. 
1303.2 Psychiatric Patient Rooms. Piping and drain 
traps in psychiatric patient rooms shall be concealed. Fixtures 
and fittings shall be resistant to vandalism. 


275 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1303.3 Locations for Ice Storage. Ice makers or ice stor- 
age containers shall be located in nursing stations or similarly 
supervised areas to minimize potential contamination. 


1303.4 Sterilizers and Bedpan Steamers. Sterilizers 
and bedpan steamers shall be installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer's installation instructions and comply with Sec- 
tion 1303.4.1 and Section 1303.4.2. 


1303.4.1 Drainage Connections. Sterilizers and 
bedpan steamers shall be connected to the sanitary 
drainage system through an air gap in accordance with 
Section 801.2. The size of indirect waste piping shall be 
not less than the size of the drain connection on the fix- 
ture. Each such indirect waste pipe shall not exceed 15 
feet (4572 mm) in length and shall be separately piped to 
a receptor. Such receptors shall be located in the same 
room as the equipment served. Except for bedpan steam- 
ers, such indirect waste pipes shall not require traps. A 
trap having a seal of not less than 3 inches (76 mm) shall 
be provided in the indirect waste pipe for a bedpan 
steamer. 


1303.4.2 Vapor Vents and Stacks. Where a steril- 
izer or bedpan steamer has provision for a vapor vent and 
such a vent is required by the manufacturer, the vent shall 
be extended to the outdoors above the roof. Sterilizer and 
bedpan steamer vapor vents shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and shall not be connected to a drainage system vent. 


1303.5 Aspirators. Provisions for aspirators or other water- 
supplied suction devices shall be installed with the specific 
approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Where aspi- 
rators are used for removing body fluids, they shall include a 
collection container to collect liquids and solid particles. 
Aspirators shall indirectly discharge to the sanitary drainage 
system through an air gap in accordance with Section 806.1. 
The potable water supply to an aspirator shall be protected 
by a vacuum breaker or equivalent backflow protection 
device in accordance with Section 603.5.9. 


1303.6 Drains. Drains shall be installed on dryers, after- 
coolers, separators, and receivers. 


1303.7 Clinical Sinks. Clinical sinks shall be installed in 
accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions 
and shall comply with Section 1303.7.1. 


1303.71 Drainage Connection. Clinical sinks shall 
be directly connected to the sanitary drainage system and 
shall be provided with approved flushing devices 
installed in accordance with Section 413.1. 


1303.8 Water Supply for Hospitals. Hospitals shall be 
provided with not less than two approved potable water 
sources that are installed in such a manner as to prevent the 
interruption of water service. 

1303.9 Work Performed in Occupied Healthcare 
Facilities. In existing, occupied, inpatient healthcare facili- 
ties, all plumbing systems installation and remodel work shall 


be performed by personnel certified in accordance with 
| ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12010. 


276 


1304.0 Medical Gas and Medical Vacuum Piping Sys- 
tems. 


1304.1 General. The installation of medical gas and med- 
ical vacuum piping systems shall comply with the require- 
ments of this chapter. 


1304.1.1 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] Medical gas sys- 
tems for health care facilities that are regulated by OSHPD 
(hospitals, skilled nursing facilities, and intermediate care 
facilities, licensed clinics, and correctional treatment cen- 
ters) shall be in accordance with NFPA 99, Standard for 
Health Care Facilities. See California Fire Code Refer- 
enced Standards (Chapter 80) for applicable version of the 
Standard. See California Building Code Table 1224.4.6.1 
for location and number of station outlets for oxygen, vac- 
uum, and medical air. 


1304.1.2 [OSHPD 1, 1R, 2, 3, 4 & 5] A medical gas 
source system serving an OSHPD 1, 2, 3 or 5 building 
shall not be located in an OSHPD IR or OSHPD 3 build- 
ing. OSHPD IR buildings тау be served by an individ- 
ual main supply line from other OSHPD buildings, with 
a main line valve as per NFPA 99. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.2.1, 
5.1.4.2.2, 5.1.4.3.1, 5.1.4.3.2] Valves shall be accessible 
and clearly labeled. 


Exception: A medical gas source system serving only an 
OSHPD IR or 3 building may be located within it. 


1304.2 Certification of Systems. Certification of med- 
ical gas and vacuum systems shall comply with the require- 
ments of Section 1306.0. 


1304.3 Construction Documents. Before a medical gas 
or medical vacuum system is installed or altered in a hospi- 
tal, medical facility, or clinic, duplicate construction docu- 
ments shall be filed with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Approval of the plans shall be obtained before issuance of a 
permit by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

1304.3.1 Requirements. Construction documents 

shall show the following: 

(1) Plot plan of the site, drawn to scale, indicating the 
location of existing or new cylinder storage areas, 
property lines, driveways, and existing or proposed 
buildings. 

(2) Piping layout of the proposed piping system or alter- 
ation, including alarms, valves, the origin of gases, 
user outlets, and user inlets. The demand and loading 
of piping, existing or future, shall also be indicated. 

(3) Complete specification of materials. 

1304.4 Extent of Work. Construction documents submitted 
to the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall clearly indicate the 
nature and extent of the work proposed and shall show in 
detail that such work will be in accordance with the provi- 
sions of this chapter. 

1304.5 Record. A record of as-built plans and valve iden- 
tification records shall remain on the site. 


1305.0 System Performance. 


1305.1 Required Operating Pressures. Medical gas and 
vacuum systems shall be capable of delivering service in the 
pressure ranges listed in Table 1305.1. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1305.1 
STANDARD DESIGNATION COLORS AND OPERATING PRESSURES FOR GAS AND VACUUM SYSTEMS 
[NFPA 99: TABLE 5.1.11] 


Im ar i NE Rem i-um 
Medical air Med Air Yellow/black 50—55 psi 
Carbon dioxide CO, Gray/black or gray/white 50—55 psi 
Helium He Brown/white 50-55 psi 
Nitrogen Мә Black/white 55-185 psi 
Nitrous oxide N20 Blue/white 50-55 psi 
Oxygen O2 Green/white or white/green 50-55 psi 
Oxygen/carbon dioxide mixtures O»5/CO, n% (n = % of СО») Green/white 50-55 psi 
Medical-surgical vacuum Med Vac White/black 15 inch to 30 inch HgV 
Waste anesthetic gas disposal WAGD Violet/white Varies with system type 


Medical-surgical vacuum/ Med-surg/WAGD 


White/black and violet/white 15 inch to 30 inch HgV 


WAGD combination 
Other mixtures Gas A% / Gas B% Colors as above ema) er gas for back: None 
ground/minor gas for text 

Nonmedical air and dental air — Yellow and white diagonal stripe/black None 
а victum and dental — White and black diagonal stripe/black boxed None 
Laboratory air = Yellow and white checkerboard/black None 
Laboratory vacuum — White and black checkerboard/black boxed None 
Instrument air — Red/white 50-185 psi 


For SI units: 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch of mercury vacuum (HgV) = 3.386 kPa 


1305.2 Minimum Flow Rates. Medical gas and vacuum 
systems shall be capable of supplying the flow rates listed in 
Table 1305.2. 


1305.3 Minimum Station Outlets and Inlets. Station 
outlets and inlets for medical gas and vacuum systems shall 
be provided as listed in Table 1305.3. 


1306.0 System Certification. 


1306.1 Certification. Prior to a medical gas or vacuum sys- 
tem being placed in service, such system shall be certified in 
accordance with Section 1306.2. 


1306.2 Certification Tests. Certification tests, verified and 
attested to by the certification agency, shall include the fol- 
lowing: 

(1) Verifying in accordance with the installation requirements. 


(2) Testing and checking for leakage, correct zoning, and 
identification of control valves. 


(3) Checking for identification and labeling of pipelines, sta- 
tion outlets, and control valves. 


(4) Testing for cross-connection, flow rate, system pressure 
drop, and system performance. 


(5) Functional testing of pressure relief valves and safety 
valves. 


(6) Functional testing of sources of supply. 


(7) Functional testing of alarm systems, including accuracy 
of system components. 


(8) Purge flushing of system and filling with specific source 
gases. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(9) Testing for purity and cleanliness of source gases. 
(10) Testing for specific gas identity at each station outlet. 


1306.3 Report Items. A report that includes the specific 
items addressed in Section 1306.2, and other information 
required by this chapter, shall be delivered to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction prior to acceptance of the system. 


1306.4 Components. Functioning of alarm components 
shall be verified in accordance with the testing and monitor- 
ing requirements of the manufacturer and the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 


TABLE 1305.2 
MINIMUM FLOW RATES 
(cubic feet per minute) 


MEDICAL SYSTEM FLOW RATE 


Oxygen 0.71 CFM per outlet! 
Nitrous Oxide 0.71 CFM per outlet! 
Medical Compressed Air 0.71 CFM per outlet! 
Nitrogen 15 CFM free air per outlet 
Vacuum 1 SCFM per inlet? 


Carbon Dioxide 


Helium 


0.71 CFM per outlet! 
0.71 CFM per outlet 


For SI units: 1 cubic foot per minute (CFM) = 0.47 L/s 

Notes: 

! А тоот designed for a permanently located respiratory ventilator ог anes- 

thesia machine shall have an outlet capable of a flow rate of 6.36 CFM (3.0 
L/s) at the station outlet. 
For testing and certification purposes, individual station inlets shall be 
capable of a flow rate of 3 SCFM (1.4 L/s), while maintaining a system 
pressure of not less than 12 inches of mercury (41 kPa) at the nearest adja- 
cent vacuum inlet. 


277 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1305.3 
MINIMUM OUTLETS AND INLETS PER STATION 
LOCATION OXYGEN ნილი, MEDICAL უელ NITROGEN HELIUM раан 
Patient rooms for medical/surgical, 
obstetrics, and pediatrics ў 1050 уре о B ш ш ш 
Examination/treatment for nursing units 1/bed 1Љеа — mE — — mE 
Intensive care (all) 3/bed 3/bed 2/bed — — — — 
Nursery! 2/bed 2/bed 1Љеа — — — — 
General operating rooms 2/room 3/room* 2/room 1/room 1/room — — 
d ut d ОВНА 2/room 3/room* 2/room = mE p mE 
Recovery delivery and 2/bed 2/bed 1/bed E = = o 
labor/delivery/recovery rooms? 2/room 3/room* 1/room 
Labor rooms 1/bed 1Љеа 1Љеа — = 5 mE 
First aid and emergency treatment? 1/bed 1/bed* 1Љеа — = == = 
Autopsy = l/station l/station => == = == 
Anesthesia workroom l/station — l/station — ЕЕ — — 
Notes: 


! Includes pediatric nursery. 
? [ncludes obstetric recovery. 


3 Emergency trauma rooms used for surgical procedures shall be classified as general operating rooms. 
^ Vacuum inlets required are in addition to inlets used as part of a scavenging system for removal of anesthetizing gases. 


Part Il - Category 1 Piped Gas 
and Vacuum Systems. 


1307.0 Central Supply Systems. 


1307.1 Terms. Where the terms medical gas or medical sup- 
port gas occur, the provisions shall apply to all piped systems 
for oxygen, nitrous oxide, medical air, carbon dioxide, 
helium, nitrogen, instrument air, and mixtures thereof. Wher- 
ever the name of a specific gas service occurs, the provision 
shall apply only to that gas. [NFPA 99:5.1.1.3] 


13072 Nature of Hazards of Gas and Vacuum Sys- 
tems. Potential fire and explosion hazards associated with 
positive pressure gas central piping systems and medical-sur- 
gical vacuum systems shall be considered in the design, 
installation, testing, operation, and maintenance of these sys- 
tems. [NFPA 99:5.1.2] 


1307.3 Permitted Locations for Medical Gases. Cen- 
tral supply systems for oxygen, medical air, nitrous oxide, 
carbon dioxide, and all other patient medical gases shall be 
piped only to medical gas outlets complying with Section 
1315.0, into areas where the gases will be used under the 
direction of licensed medical professionals for purposes con- 
gruent with the following: 


(1) Direct respiration by patients. 


(2) Clinical application of the gas to a patient, such as the 
use of an insufflator to inject carbon dioxide into patient 
body cavities during laparoscopic surgery and carbon 
dioxide used to purge heart-lung machine blood flow 
ways. 

(3) Medical device applications directly related to respira- 
tion. 


(4) Power for medical devices used directly on patients. 


278 


(5) Calibration of medical devices intended for Section 
1307.3(1) through Section 1307.3(4). 


(6) Simulation centers for the education, training, and assess- 
ment of health care professionals. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.5.2] 


13074 Materials. Materials used in central supply systems 
shall meet the following requirements: 


(1) In those portions of systems intended to handle oxygen 
at gauge pressures greater than 350 pounds-force per 
square inch (psi) (2413 kPa), interconnecting hose shall 
contain no polymeric materials. 


(2) In those portions of systems intended to handle oxygen 
or nitrous oxide material, construction shall be compati- 
ble with oxygen under the temperatures and pressures to 
which the components can be exposed in the containment 
and use of oxygen, nitrous oxide, mixtures of these gases, 
or mixtures containing more than 23.5 percent oxygen. 

(3) If potentially exposed to cryogenic temperatures, mate- 
rials shall be designed for low temperature service. 

(4) If intended for outdoor installation, materials shall be 


installed per the manufacturer's requirements. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.5.4] 


1308.0 Pressure-Regulating Equipment. 


1308.1 Where Required. Pressure-regulating equipment 
shall be installed in the supply main upstream ofthe final line- 
pressure valve. Where multiple piping systems for the same 
gas at different operating pressures are required, separate 
pressure-regulating equipment, relief valves, and source shut- 
off valves shall be provided for each pressure. 


1308.2 Pressure Relief Valves. All pressure relief valves 
shall meet the following requirements: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(1) They shall be of brass, bronze, or stainless steel con- 
struction. 


(2) They shall be designed for the specific gas service. 


(3) They shall have a relief pressure setting not higher than 
the maximum allowable working pressure (MAWP) of 
the component with the lowest working pressure rating in 
the portion of the system being protected. 


(4) They shall be vented to the outside of the building, 
except that relief valves for compressed air systems hav- 
ing less than 3000 cubic feet (84 950 L) at STP shall be 
permitted to be diffused locally by means that will not 
restrict the flow. 


(5) They shall have a vent discharge line that is not smaller 
than the size of the relief valve outlet or 4 NPS (20 mm), 
whichever is larger. 


(6) Where two or more relief valves discharge into a common 
vent line, the internal cross-sectional area of the common 
line shall be not less than the aggregate cross-sectional 
area of all relief valve vent discharge lines served. 


(7) They shall not discharge into locations creating potential 
hazards. 


(8) They shall have the discharge terminal turned down and 
screened to prevent the entry of rain, snow, or vermin. 


(9) They shall be designed in accordance with ASME B31.3. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.3.5.6.1] 


1308.3 Pressure-Relief Valve Requirements. Central 
supply systems for positive pressure gases shall include one 
or more relief valves, all meeting the following requirements: 


(1) They shall be located between each final line regulator 
and the source valve. 


(2) They shall have a relief setting that is 50 percent above 
the normal system operating pressure, as indicated in 
Table 1305.1. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.5.6.4] 


1309.0 Oxygen Concentrator Supply Units. 


1309.1 Oxygen Requirements. Oxygen concentrator sup- 
ply units for use with medical gas pipelines shall produce 
oxygen meeting the requirements of Oxygen 93 USP or Oxy- 
gen USP. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.1] 

1309.2 Particulate Size. Output shall have less than or 
equal to 1.686 x 10“ pounds per cubic yard (1 mg/m?) of per- 
manent particulates sized 1 micron or larger at normal atmos- 
pheric pressure. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.2] 

1309.3 Suitability. Materials of construction on the air side 


of the oxygen concentrator unit shall be suitable for the serv- 

ice as determined by the manufacturer. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.3] 

1309.4 Compatible Materials. Materials of construction 

on the oxygen side of the oxygen concentrator unit shall com- 

ply with Section 1307.4. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.4] 

1309.5 Oxygen Concentrator Components. The com- 

ponents that make up the oxygen concentrator unit shall be as 

follows: 

(1) The manufacturer of the concentrator unit shall be per- 
mitted to use such components and arrangement of such 
components as needed to produce oxygen complying 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


with Section 1309.1 in the quantity as required by the 
facility, except where otherwise specifically defined in 
this code. 


(2) Air receivers and oxygen accumulators, where used, 
shall comply with Section VIII.1, *Unfired Pressure Ves- 
sels," of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessels Code 
and be provided with overpressure relief valves. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.9.1.5] 


1309.6 Supply Air Quality. The supply air to the concen- 
trator(s) shall be of a quality to ensure the oxygen concentra- | 
tor unit can produce oxygen complying with Section 1309.1 
and shall not be subject to normally anticipated contamination 
(e.g., vehicle or other exhausts, gas leakage, discharge from 
vents, flooding). [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.6] | 


1309.7 Electrical Components. The oxygen concentrator 
supply unit and any associated electrical equipment shall be 
provided with, at a minimum, the following electrical com- | 
ponents: 


(1) Either a disconnect switch for each major electrical com- 
ponent or a single disconnect that deactivates all electri- 
cal components in the concentrator unit. 


(2) Motor starting devices with overload protection for any 
component with an electrical motor over 2 hp (1.5 kW). 
[NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.7] 


1309.8 Vent Valve. A vent valve shall be provided as fol- 
lows: 


(1) Located on the source side of the concentrator outlet iso- 
lation valve to permit the operation of the oxygen con- 
centrator unit for validation, calibration, and testing 
while the unit is isolated from the pipeline system. 


(2) Sized to allow for at least 25 percent of the oxygen con- 
centrator unit flow. 


(3) Vented to a location compliant with Section 1309.8.1. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.8] 


1309.8.1 Venting of Relief Valves. Indoor supply 
systems shall have all relief valves vented per Section 
1308.2(4) through Section 1308.2(9). [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.3.3.2] 
1309.9 Valved Sample Port. A DN8 (NPS 1/4) valved 
sample port shall be provided near the oxygen concentration 
monitor sensor connection for sampling of the gas from the 
oxygen concentrator unit. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.9] 
1309.10 Suitable Filter. At least one 0.1 micron filter suit- 
able for oxygen service shall be provided at the outlet of the 
oxygen concentrator supply unit. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.10] 
1309.11 Check Valve. A check valve shall be provided at 
the outlet of the oxygen concentrator supply unit to prevent 
backflow into the oxygen concentrator supply unit and to 
allow service to the unit. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.11] 
1309.12 Outlet Valve. An outlet valve shall be provided to 
isolate all components of the oxygen concentrator from the 
pipeline with the following characteristics: 
(1) The valve shall have both manual and automatic actua- 
tion with visual indication of open or closed. 


279 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(2) The valve shall close automatically whenever the oxy- 
gen concentrator unit is not producing oxygen of a con- 
centration equal to that in Section 1309.1. 


(3) Continuing operation of the oxygen concentrator supply 
unit through the vent mode shall be permitted with the 
isolating valve closed. 


(4) The isolating valve, when automatically closed due to 
low concentration, shall require manual reset to ensure 
the oxygen concentrator supply unit is examined prior to 
return to service. 


(5) Closing the isolating valve, whether automatically or 
manually, shall activate an alarm signal at the master 
alarms (see Section 1317.1.1) indicating that the oxygen 
concentrator supply unit is disconnected. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.9.1.12] 


1309.13 Oxygen Concentration Monitor. The oxygen 
concentrator supply unit shall be provided with an oxygen 
concentration monitor with the following characteristics: 


(1) The monitor shall be capable of monitoring 99 percent 
oxygen concentration with 1 percent accuracy. 


(2) The monitor shall continuously display the oxygen con- 
centration and shall activate local alarm and master 
alarms per NFPA 99 when a concentration lower than 91 
percent 1s observed. 


(3) The monitor shall continuously display the oxygen con- 
centration. 


(4) It shall be permitted to insert the monitor into the pipeline 
without a demand check. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.9.1.13] 


1310.0 Category 1 Medical Air Central Supply Sys- 
tems. 


1310.1 Quality of Medical Air. Medical air shall be 
required to have the following characteristics: 


(1) It shall be supplied from cylinders, bulk containers, or 
medical air compressor sources, or it shall be reconsti- 
tuted from oxygen USP and oil-free, dry nitrogen NF. 


(2) It shall meet the requirements of medical air USP. 
(3) It shall have no detectable liquid hydrocarbons. 
(4) It shall have less than 25 ppm gaseous hydrocarbons. 


(5) It shall have equal to or less than 1.686 x 10% pounds per 
cubic yard (1 mg/m?) of permanent particulates sized 1 
micron or larger in the air at normal atmospheric pres- 
sure. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.1] 


1310.2 Uses of Medical Air. Medical air sources shall be 
connected to the medical air distribution system only and 
shall be used only for air in the application of human respi- 
ration and calibration of medical devices for respiratory appli- 
cation. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.2] 


1310.3 Medical Air Compressors. Medical air compres- 
sors shall be installed in a well-lit, ventilated, and clean loca- 
tion and shall be accessible. The location shall be provided 
with drainage facilities in accordance with this code. The 
medical air compressor area shall be located separately from 
medical gas cylinder system sources, and shall be readily 
accessible for maintenance. 


280 


1310.3.1 Category 1 Medical Air Compressor. 
Medical air compressors shall be sufficient to serve the 
peak calculated demand with the largest single compres- 
sor out of service. In no case shall there be fewer than 
two compressors. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.9(B)] 


1310.3.2 Required Components. Medical air com- 
pressor systems shall consist of the following: 


(1) Components shall be arranged to allow service and 
a continuous supply of medical air in the event ofa 
single fault failure. 


Component arrangement shall be permitted to 
vary as required by the technology(ies) employed, 
provided that an equal level of operating redundancy 
and medical air quality is maintained. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.6.3.9(A)(1), 5.1.3.6.3.9(A)(2)] 


(2) Automatic means to prevent backflow from all on- 
cycle compressors through all off-cycle compressors. 


(3) Manual shutoff valve to isolate each compressor 
from the centrally piped system and from other com- 
pressors for maintenance or repair without loss of 
pressure in the system. 


(4) Intake filter-muffler(s) of the dry type. 


(5) Pressure relief valve(s) set at 50 percent above line 
pressure. 


(6) Piping and components between the compressor and 
the source shutoff valve that do not contribute to 
contaminant levels. 

(7) Except as defined in Section 1310.3.2(1) through 
Section 1310.3.2(6), materials and devices used 
between the medical air intake and the medical air 
source valve that are of any design or construction 
appropriate for the service as determined by the 
manufacturer. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.2 (2-7)] 


1310.4 Medical Air Receivers. Receivers for medical air 

shall meet the following requirements: 

(1) They shall be made of corrosion-resistant materials or 
otherwise be made corrosion resistant. 


(2 


МУ 


They shall comply with Section УШ.1, *Unfired Pressure 
Vessels," of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 


They shall be equipped with a pressure relief valve, auto- 
matic drain, manual drain, sight glass, and pressure indi- 
cator. 


(3 


— 


(4 


— 


They shall be of a capacity sufficient to prevent the com- 
pressors from short-cycling. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.6] 
1310.5 Valves. A medical air receiver(s) shall be provided 
with proper valves to allow the flow of compressed air to 
enter and exit out of separate receiver ports during normal 
operation and allow the receiver to be bypassed during serv- 
ice without shutting down the supply of medical air. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.6.3.9(D)] 


1311.0 Compressor Intake. 


1311.1 Air Sources. Air sources for medical air compressors 
shall comply with Section 1311.2 through Section 1311.6. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1311.2 Medical Air Compressor Source. The medical 
air compressors shall draw their air from a source of clean 
air. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.11(A)] 


If an air source equal to or better than outside air (e.g., air 
already filtered for use in operating room ventilating systems) 
is available, it shall be permitted to be used for the medical air 
compressors with the following provisions: 


(1) This alternate source of supply air shall be available on 
a continuous 24 hours-per-day, 7 day-per-week basis. 


(2) Ventilating systems having fans with motors or drive 
belts located in the airstream shall not be used as a source 
of medical air intake. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.11(E)] 


1311.3 Air Intakes. Compressor intake piping shall be per- 
mitted to be made of materials and use a joining technique as 
permitted under Section 1319.0 and Section 1320.0. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.6.3.11(F)] 


1311.4 Location. Medical air intakes shall be located as fol- 
lows: 


(1) The medical air intake shall be located a minimum of 25 
feet (7620 mm) from ventilating system exhausts, fuel 
storage vents, combustion vents, plumbing vents, vac- 
uum and WAGD discharges, or areas that can collect 
vehicular exhausts or other noxious fumes. 


(2) The medical air intake shall be located a minimum of 20 
feet (6096 mm) above ground level. 


(3) The medical air intake shall be located a minimum of 10 
feet (3048 mm) from any door, window, or other open- 
ing in the building. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.11(B-D)] 


1311.5 Separate Compressors. Air intakes for separate 
compressors shall be permitted to be joined together to one 
common intake where the following conditions are met: 


(1) The common intake is sized to minimize backpressure 
in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. 


(2) Each compressor can be isolated by manual or check 
valve, blind flange, or tube cap to prevent open inlet pip- 
ing when the compressor(s) is removed for service from 
the consequent backflow of room air into the other com- 
pressor(s). [NFPA 99:5.1.3.6.3.11(G)] 


1311.6 Screening. The end of the intake shall be turned 
down and screened or otherwise be protected against the entry 
of vermin, debris, or precipitation by screening fabricated or 
composed of а  noncorroding material [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.6.3.11(H)] 


1312.0 Medical Surgical Vacuum Central Supply Sys- 
tems. 


1312.1 General. The vacuum plant shall be installed in a 
well-lit, ventilated, and clean location with accessibility. The 
location shall be provided with drainage facilities in accordance 
with this code. The vacuum plant, where installed as a source, 
shall be located separately from other medical vacuum system 
sources and shall be readily accessible for maintenance. 


1312.2 Medical-Surgical Vacuum Sources. Medical- 
surgical vacuum central supply systems shall consist of the 
following: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) Two or more vacuum pumps sufficient to serve the peak 
calculated demand with the largest single vacuum pump 
out of service. 


(2) Automatic means to prevent backflow from any on-cycle 
vacuum pumps through any off-cycle vacuum pumps. 


(3) Shutoff valve or other isolation means to isolate each 
vacuum pump from the centrally piped system, and other 
vacuum pumps for maintenance or repair without loss of 
vacuum in the system. 

(4) Vacuum receiver. 

(5) Piping between the vacuum pump(s), discharge(s), 
receiver(s), and vacuum source shutoff valve in accor- 
dance with Section 1319.0, except brass, galvanized, or 
black steel pipe, which is permitted to be used as recom- 
mended by the manufacturer. 


(6) Except as defined in Section 1312.2(1) through Section 
1312.2(5), materials and devices used between the med- 
ical vacuum exhaust and the medical vacuum source that 
are permitted to be of any design or construction appro- 
priate for the service as determined by the manufacturer. 


(7) Vacuum filtration per Section 1312.4. [NFPA 


99:5.1.3.7.1.1] 

1312.3 Vacuum Receivers. Receivers for vacuum shall 

meet the following requirements: 

(1) They shall be made of materials deemed suitable by the 
manufacturer. 

(2) They shall comply with Section VIII.1, “Unfired Pressure 
Vessels,” of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 

(3) They shall be capable of withstanding a gauge pressure 
of 60 psi (414 kPa) and 30 inch (762 mm) gauge HgV. 


(4) They shall be equipped with a manual drain. 


(5) They shall be of a capacity based on the technology of 
the pumps. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.3] 


1312.4 Vacuum Filtration. Central supply systems for vac- 
uum other than liquid ring pumps shall be provided with inlet | 
filtration with the following characteristics: 

(1) Filtration shall be at least duplex to allow one filter to be 
exchanged without impairing the vacuum system. I 

(2) Filtration shall be located on the patient side of the vac- 
uum producer. 

(3) Filters shall be efficient to 0.3 и and 99.97 percent HEPA | 
or better, per DOE-STD-3020. 

(4) Filtration shall be sized for 100 percent of the peak cal- 
culated demand while one filter or filter bundle is 1so- 
lated. 

(5) It shall be permitted to group multiple filters into bun- 
dles to achieve the required capacities. 

(6) The system shall be provided with isolation valves on the 
source side of each filter or filter bundle and isolation 
valves on the patient side of each filter or filter bundle, 
permitting the filters to be isolated without shutting off 
flow to the central supply system. 

(7) A means shall be available to allow the user to observe 
any accumulations of liquids. 


281 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(8) A vacuum relief petcock shall be provided to allow vac- 
uum to be relieved in the filter canister during filter 
replacement. 


(9) Filter elements and canisters shall be permitted to be con- 
structed of materials as deemed suitable by the manu- 
facturer. 


(10) In normal operation, one filter or filter bundle shall be 
isolated from the system to be available for service 
should a blockage in the operating filter occur or rota- 
tion of the filters be desired after filter element exchange. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.4] 


1312.5 Piping Arrangement and Redundancies. Pip- 
ing arrangement shall be as follows: 


(1) Piping shall be arranged to allow service and a continu- 
ous supply of medical-surgical vacuum in the event of a 
single fault failure. 


(2) Piping arrangement shall be permitted to vary based on 
the technology(ies) employed, provided that an equal 
level of operating redundancy is maintained. 


(3) Where only one set of vacuum pumps is available for a 
combined medical-surgical vacuum system and an analy- 
sis, a research, or a teaching laboratory vacuum system, 
such laboratories shall be connected separately from the 
medical-surgical system directly to the receiver tank 
through its own isolation valve and fluid trap located at 
the receiver, and between the isolation valve and fluid 
trap, a scrubber shall be permitted to be installed. [NFPA 
99:5.1.3.7.5, 5.1.3.7.5.1] 

1312.6 Piping Serviceability. The medical-surgical vac- 

uum receiver(s) shall be serviceable without shutting down 

the medical-surgical vacuum system by any method to ensure 
continuation of service to the facility's medical-surgical 
pipeline distribution system. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.5.2] 

1312.7 Shutoff Valve. Medical-surgical vacuum central 

supply systems shall be provided with a source shutoff valve 

per Section 1314.6. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.5.3] 


1313.0 Medical-Surgical Vacuum Exhaust. 

1313.1 Vacuum Source Exhausts. The medical-surgical 

vacuum pumps shall exhaust in a manner and location that 

minimizes the hazards of noise and contamination to the facil- 
ity and its environment. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.7.1] 

1313.2 Location. The exhaust shall be located as follows: 

(1) Outdoors. 

(2) At least 25 feet (7620 mm) from any door, window, air 
intake, or other openings in buildings or places of public 
assembly. 

(3) Ata level different from air intakes. 

(4) Where prevailing winds, adjacent buildings, topography, 
or other influences will not divert the exhaust into occu- 
pied areas or prevent dispersion of the exhaust. [NFPA 
99: 5.1.3.7.7.2] 

1313.3 Screening. The end of the exhaust shall be turned 

down and screened or otherwise be protected against the entry 

of vermin, debris, or precipitation by screening fabricated or 
composed of a noncorroding material. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.7.3] 


282 


1313.4 Dips and Loops. The exhaust shall be free of dips 
and loops that might trap condensate or oil or provided with 
a drip leg and valved drain at the bottom of the low point. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.7.5] 


1313.5 Multiple Pumps. Vacuum exhausts from multiple 
pumps shall be permitted to be joined together to one com- 
mon exhaust where the following conditions are met: 

(1) The common exhaust is sized to minimize back pressure | 


in accordance with the pump manufacturer's recom- 
mendations. 


(2) Each pump can be isolated by manual or check valve, 
blind flange, or tube cap to prevent open exhaust piping 
when the pump(s) is removed for service from consequent 
flow of exhaust air into the room. [NFPA 99:5.1.3.7.7.6] 


1314.0 Valves. 


1314.1 Gas and Vacuum Shutoff Valves. Shutoff valves 
shall be provided to isolate sections or portions of the piped 
distribution system for maintenance, repair, or planned future 
expansion need and to facilitate periodic testing. [NFPA 
99:5.1.4.1.1] 

1314.2 Security. All valves, except valves in zone valve 
box assemblies, shall be secured by any of the following 
means: 

(1) Located in secured areas. 

(2) Locked or latched in their operating position. 


(3) Located above ceilings, but remaining accessible and not 
obstructed. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.1.2] 


1314.3 Labeled. All valves shall be labeled as to gas sup- 
plied and the area(s) controlled, in accordance with Section 
1323.14. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.1.3] 


1314.4 Accessibility. Zone valves shall be installed in 
valve boxes with removable covers large enough to allow 
manual operation of valves. 


Zone valves for use in certain areas, such as psychiatric 
or pediatric areas, shall be permitted to be secured with the 
approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction to prevent inap- 
propriate access. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.1.4] 


1314.4.1 Flammable Gases. Valves for nonflamma- 
ble medical gases shall not be installed with valves for 
flammable gases in the same zone valve box assembly 
with flammable gases. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.1.5] 
1314.5 Valve Types. New or replacement valves shall be 
permitted to be of any type as long as they meet the follow- 
ing conditions: 
(1) They have a minimum Cv factor in accordance with 
Table 1314.5(1) or Table 1314.5(2). I 
(2) They use a quarter turn to off. 
(3) They are constructed of materials suitable for the service. 


(4) They are provided with copper tube extensions by the 
manufacturer for brazing or with corrugated medical tub- 
ing (CMT) fittings. 

(5) They indicate to the operator if the valve is open or 
closed. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(6) They permit in-line serviceability. 
(7) They are cleaned for oxygen service by the manufacturer 
if used for any positive-pressure service. 


(8) They have threaded purge ports on the patient side and 
the source side. 


(9) They have a minimum working pressure equal to or 
greater than the relief valve protecting the piping system 
on which the valve is installed for any positive-pressure 
service. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.1.6] 


I TABLE 1314.5(1) 
POSITIVE PRESSURE GASES 
[NFPA 99: TABLE 5.1.4.1.6(a)] 


VALVE SIZE MINIMUM Cv 
(inch) (full open) 

1 17 

3/4 31 

1 60 
ПА 110 
1% 169 

2 357 
2\5 390 

3 912 

4 1837 

For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 
TABLE 1314.5(2) 
VACUUM AND WAGD 
[NFPA 99:TABLE 5.1.4.1.6(b)] 
VALVE SIZE MINIMUM Cv 
(inch) (full open) 

l^ 17 

3/4 31 

1 60 
ПА 110 
1!^ 169 

2 357 
2\5 196 

3 302 

4 600 

Э 1022 

6 1579 

8 3136 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm 


1314.6 Source Valves. A shutoff valve shall be placed at the 
immediate connection of each central supply system to the piped 
distribution system to allow the entire central supply system, 
including all accessory devices (e.g., air dryers, final line regu- 
lators), to be isolated from the facility. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.2.1] 


1314.6.1 Location. The source valve shall be located 
in the immediate vicinity of the central supply system. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.4.2.2] 


1314.7 Main Line Valve. A shutoff valve shall be provided 
in the main supply line inside of the buildings being served, 
except where one or more of the following conditions exist: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) The source and source valve are located inside the build- 
ing served. 


(2) The source system is physically mounted to the wall of 
the building served, and the pipeline enters the building 
in the immediate vicinity of the source valve. [NFPA 
99:5.1.4.3.1] 


1314.7.1 Location. The main line valve shall be located 
on the facility side of the source valve and outside of the 
source room, the enclosure, or where the main line first 
enters the building. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.3.2] 
1314.8 Riser Valves. Each riser supplied from the main line 
shall be provided with a shutoff valve in the riser adjacent to 
the main line. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.4] 
1314.9 Service Valves. Service valves shall be installed to 
allow servicing or modification of lateral branch piping from 
a main or riser without shutting down the entire main, riser, 
or facility. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.5.1] 
1314.9.1 Branch Piping. Only one service valve shall 
be required for each branch off of a riser, regardless of 
how many zone valve boxes are installed on that lateral. 
Service valves shall be placed in the branch piping 
prior to any zone valve box assembly on that branch. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.4.5.2, 5.1.4.5.3] 
1314.10 Zone Valves. АП station outlets/inlets shall be sup- 
plied through a zone valve, which shall be placed as follows: 
(1) It is installed so that a wall intervenes between the valve 
and the outlets/inlets that it controls. 


(2) It is readily operable from a standing position. 
(3) Itis installed where it is visible and accessible at all times. 


(4) Itis not installed where it can be hidden from plain view, 
such as behind normally open or normally closed doors. 


(5) It is not installed in a room with the station outlets/inlets 
that 1t controls. 


(6) It is not installed in rooms, areas, or closets that can be 
closed or locked. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.6.1] 


1314.10.1 Readily Accessible. A zone valve in each 

medical gas or vacuum line shall be provided for each 

Category 1 space and anesthetizing location for moder- 

ate sedation, deep sedation, or general anesthesia specific 

for the occupancy, and shall be located as follows: | 

(1) They are installed immediately outside the area con- 
trolled. 

(2) They are installed where they are visible and acces- 
sible at all times. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.6.2] 

1314.10.2 Arrangement. Piping on the patient side of 

zone valves shall be arranged to provide the following: 

(1) Shutting off the supply of medical gas or vacuum to 
one zone will not affect the supply of medical gas 
or vacuum to another zone or the rest of the system. 

(2) Service will only be to outlets/inlets located on that 
same story. 

(3) All gas delivery columns, hose reels, ceiling tracks, 
control panels, pendants, booms, or other special 


installations are located on the patient side of the 
zone valve. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.6.3] 


283 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1314.10.3 Indicators. A pressure/vacuum indicator 
shall be provided on the station outlet/inlet side of each 
zone valve. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.6.4] 


1314.11 In-Line Shutoff Valves. Optional in-line valves 
shall be permitted to be installed to isolate or shut off piping 
for servicing of individual rooms or areas. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.7] 


1314.12 Valves for Future Connections. Future con- 
nection valves shall be labeled as to gas content. [NFPA 
99:5.1.4.8.1] 


1314.12.1 Downstream Piping. Downstream piping 
shall be closed with a brazed cap with tubing allowance 
for cutting and rebrazing. [NFPA 99:5.1.4.8.2] 


1315.0 Station Outlets and Inlets. 


1315.1 General. Each station outlet/inlet for medical gases 
or vacuums shall be gas-specific, whether the outlet/inlet is 
threaded or is a noninterchangeable quick coupler. [NFPA 
99:5.1.5.1] 


1315.2 Required Valves. Each station outlet shall consist 
of a primary and a secondary valve (or assembly). 


Each station inlet shall consist of a primary valve (or 
assembly) and shall be permitted to include a secondary valve 
(or assembly). [NFPA 99:5.1.5.2, 5.1.5.3] 


1315.3 Secondary Valve. The secondary valve (or assem- 
bly) shall close automatically to stop the flow of gas (or vac- 
uum, if provided) when the primary valve (or assembly) is 
removed. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.4] 


1315.4 Identification. Each outlet/inlet shall be legibly iden- 
tified in accordance with Section 1323.15. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.5] 


1315.5 Threaded Outlets/Fittings. Threaded outlets/inlets 
shall be noninterchangeable connections complying with the 
mandatory requirements of CGA V-5. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.6] 


1315.6 Gas-Specific Station Outlet/Inlet. Each station 
outlet/inlet, including those mounted in columns, hose reels, 
ceiling tracks, or other special installations, shall be designed 
so that parts or components that are required to be gas-spe- 
cific for compliance with Section 1315.1 and Section 1315.8 
cannot be interchanged between the station outlet/inlet for 
different gases. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.7] 


1315.7 Common Parts. The use of common parts in out- 
lets/inlets, such as springs, O-rings, fasteners, seals, and shut- 
off poppets, shall be permitted. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.8] 

1315.8 Marking of Components. Components of a vac- 
uum station inlet necessary for the maintenance of vacuum 
specificity shall be legibly marked to identify them as com- 
ponents or parts of a vacuum or suction system. [NFPA 
99:5.1.5.9] 


1315.9 Components Not Specific to a Vacuum. Com- 
ponents of inlets not specific to a vacuum shall not be 
required to be marked. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.10] 

1315.10 Factory-Installed Copper Inlet Tubes. Factory- 
installed copper inlet tubes on station outlets extending no 
further than 8 inches (203 mm) from the body of the terminal 


284 


shall be not less than DN8 (NPS !/4) (?/s inch О.Р.) size, with 
0.3 inch (7.6 mm) minimum inside diameter. [NFPA 
99:5.1.5.11] 


1315.11 Factory-Installed Copper Outlet Tubes. Fac- 
tory-installed copper outlet tubes on station inlets extending 
no further than 8 inches (203 mm) from the body of the ter- 
minal shall be not less than DN10 (NPS 5%) ('/ in. О.Р.) size, 
with 0.4 inch (10.2 mm) minimum inside diameter. [NFPA 
99:5.1.5.12] 


1315.12 Protection from Damage. Station outlets/inlets 
shall be permitted to be recessed or otherwise protected from 
damage. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.13] 


1315.13 Multiple Wall Outlets/Inlets. When multiple wall 
outlets/inlets are installed, they shall be spaced to allow the 
simultaneous use of adjacent outlets/inlets with any of the 
various types of therapy equipment. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.14] 
1315.14 Nonstandard Operation Pressures. Station 
outlets in systems having nonstandard operating pressures 
shall meet the following additional requirements: 

(1) They shall be gas-specific. 

(2) They shall be pressure-specific where a single gas is 
piped at more than one operating pressure [e.g., a station 
outlet for oxygen at 80 psi (552 kPa) shall not accept an 
adapter for oxygen at 50 psi (345 kPa)]. 


(3 


— 


If operated at a pressure in excess of 80 psi (552 kPa), 
they shall be either D.I.S.S. connectors or comply with 
Section 1315.14(4). 


If operated at a gauge pressure between 200 psi and 300 
psi (1379 kPa and 2068 kPa), the station outlet shall be 
designed so as to prevent the removal of the adapter until 
the pressure has been relieved to prevent the adapter 
injuring the user or others when removed from the out- 
let. [NFPA 99:5.1.5.15] 


1315.15 Post Installation. After installation of the piping, 
but before installation of the station outlets and inlets and 
other medical gas and medical gas system components (e.g., 
pressure-actuating switches for alarms, manifolds, pressure 
gauges, or pressure relief valves), the line shall be blown clear 
using oil-free, dry nitrogen NF. 


(4 


— 


1316.0 Pressure and Vacuum Indicator Locations. 


1316.1 Isolation. A pressure-relief valve shall not be iso- 
lated from its intended use by a valve. 


1316.2 Pressure and Vacuum Indicator Locations. 
Pressure/vacuum indicators shall be readable from a stand- 
ing position. Pressure/vacuum indicators shall be provided at 
the following locations, as a minimum: 


(1) Adjacent to the alarm-initiating device for source main 
line pressure and vacuum alarms in the master alarm sys- 
tem. 

(2) At or in area alarm panels to indicate the pressure/vac- 

uum at the alarm activating device for each system that 

is monitored by the panel. 

On the station outlet/inlet side of zone valves. [NFPA 

99:5.1.8.2.1, 5.1.8.2.2] 


(3 


— 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1317.0 Warning Systems. 


13171 Category 1. AII master, area, and local alarm sys- 
tems used for medical gas and vacuum systems shall include 
the following: 


(1) Separate visual indicators for each condition monitored, 
except as permitted in Section 1317.1.2 for local alarms 
that are displayed on master alarm panels. 


(2) Visual indicators that remain in alarm until the situation 
that has caused the alarm is resolved. 


(3) Cancelable audible indication of each alarm condition 
that produces a sound with a minimum level of 80 dBA 
at 3 feet (914 mm). 


(4) Means to indicate a lamp or LED failure and audible fail- 
ure. 


(5) Visual and audible indication that the communication 
with an alarm-initiating device is disconnected. 


(6) Labeling of each indicator, indicating the condition mon- 
itored. 


(7) Labeling of each alarm panel for its area of surveillance. 


(8) Reinitiating of the audible signal if another alarm condi- 
tion occurs while the audible alarm is silenced. 


(9) Power for master alarms, area alarms, sensors, and 
switches from the life safety branch of the essential elec- 
trical system as described in NFPA 99. 


(10) Power for local alarms, dew point sensors, and carbon 
monoxide sensors permitted to be from the same essen- 
tial electrical branch as is used to power the air com- 
pressor system. 

(11) Where used for communications, wiring from switches 
or sensors that is supervised or protected as required by 
NFPA 70 for life safety and critical branches circuits in 
which protection is any of the following types: 

(a) Conduit 
(b) Free air 
(c) Wire 

(d) Cable tray 
(e) Raceways 

(12) Communication devices that do not use electrical wiring 
for signal transmission and are supervised such that fail- 
ure of communication initiates an alarm. 

(13) Assurance by the responsible authority of the facility that 
the labeling of alarms, where room numbers or designa- 
tions are used, is accurate and up-to-date. 

(14) Provisions for automatic restart after a power loss of 10 
seconds (e.g., during generator start-up) without giving 
false signals or requiring manual reset. 

(15) Alarm switches/sensors installed so as to be removable 
and accessible for service and testing. [NFPA 99:5.1.9.1] 
1317.1.1 Master Alarms. A master alarm system shall 
be provided to monitor the operation and condition of the 
source of supply, the reserve source (if any), and the 


pressure in the main lines of each medical gas and vac- 
uum piping system. [NFPA 99:5.1.9.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1317.1.2 Master Alarm Signal. The master alarm shall 
include at least one signal from the source equipment to 
indicate a problem with the source equipment at this 
location. This master alarm signal shall activate when 
any of the required local alarm signals for this source 
equipment activates. [NFPA 99:5.1.9.5.2] 


1318.0 Piping Materials for Field-Installed Positive 
Pressure Medical Gas Systems. 


1318.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply 
to field-installed piping for the distribution of medical gas 
systems. 


1318.2 Cleaning. Tubes, valves, fittings, station outlets, and 
other piping components in medical gas systems shall have 
been cleaned for oxygen service by the manufacturer prior to 
installation in accordance with the mandatory requirements 
of CGA G-4.1, except that fittings shall be permitted to be 
cleaned by a supplier or agency other than the manufacturer. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.1.1] 

Where tube ends, fittings or other components become 
contaminated before installation they shall be recleaned in 
accordance with Section 1321.8.7 and Section 1321.8.8. 
1318.3 Delivery. Each length of tube shall be delivered 
plugged or capped by the manufacturer and kept sealed until 
prepared for installation. Fittings, valves, and other components 
shall be delivered sealed and labeled and kept sealed until pre- 
pared for installation. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.1.2, 5.1.10.1.3] 
1318.4 Tubes for Medical Gas Systems. Tubes shall be 
hard-drawn seamless copper in accordance with ASTM 
B819, medical gas tube, Type L, except Type K shall be used 
where operating pressures are above a gauge pressure of 185 
psi (1276 kPa) and the pipe sizes are larger than DN80 [(NPS 
3) (3! inches O.D.)]. {NFPA 99:5.1.10.1.4} 

1318.5 Manufacturer Markings. ASTM B819, medical gas 
tube shall be identified by the manufacturer's markings “OXY,” 
“MED,” “OXY/MED,” “OXY/ACR,” or “ACR/MED” in blue 
(Type L) or green (Type K). [NFPA 99:5.1.10.1.7] 

1318.6 Documentation. The installer shall furnish docu- 
mentation certifying that all installed piping materials comply 
with the requirements of Section 1318.2. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.1.8] 


1319.0 Piping Materials for Field-Installed Medical- 
Surgical Vacuum Systems. 


1319.1 Tubes for Medical Vacuum Systems. Piping for 
vacuum systems shall be constructed of any of the following: 


(1) Hard-drawn seamless copper tube in accordance with the 
following: 


(a) ASTM B88, copper tube (Type K, Type L, or Type 
M) 

(b) ASTM B280, copper ACR tube 

(c) ASTM B819, copper medical gas tubing (Type K or 
Type L) 

(2) Stainless steel tube in accordance with the following: 
(a) ASTM A269 TP304L or 316L 
(b) ASTM A312 TP304L or 316L 


285 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(c) ASTM A312 TP 304L/316L, Schedule 5S pipe, and 
ASTM A403 WP304L/316L, Schedule 5S fittings 
{NFPA 99:5.1.10.2.1} 


1319.1.1 Where Not Required. If medical gas tube in 
accordance with ASTM B819, Standard Specification for 
Seamless Copper Tube for Medical Gas Systems, is used 
for vacuum piping, such special marking shall not be 
required. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.2.2.2] 


1320.0 Joints and Connections. 


1320.1 General. This section sets forth the requirements for 
pipe joint installations for a medical gas or vacuum system. 


1320.2 Changes in Direction. Positive pressure patient 
gas systems, medical support gas systems, and vacuum sys- 
tems constructed of hard-drawn seamless copper or stainless 
steel tubing shall have all turns, offsets, and other changes in 
direction made using fittings or techniques appropriate to any 
of the following acceptable joining methods: 


(1) Brazing, as described in Section 1321.0. 


(2) Welding, as described in Section 1322.1 through Section 
1322.2.1. 


(3) Memory metal fittings, as described in Section 1322.3. 


(4) Axially swaged, elastic preload fittings, as described in 
Section 1322.4. 


(5) Threaded, as described in Section 1322.5. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.3.1] 


1320.2.1 Medical Vacuum Systems. Vacuum sys- 
tems and WAGD systems fabricated from copper tubing 
shall be permitted to have branch connections made 
using mechanically formed, drilled, and extruded tee- 
branch connections that are formed in accordance with 
the tool manufacturer's instructions. Such branch con- 
nections shall be joined by brazing, as described in Sec- 
tion 1321.0. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.3.3] 


1321.0 Brazed Joints. 


1321.1 Brazed Joints and Fittings. Fittings shall be 
wrought-copper capillary fittings complying with ASME 
B16.22, or brazed fittings complying with ASME B16.50. 
Cast copper alloy fittings shall not be permitted. 

Brazed joints shall be made using a brazing alloy that 
exhibits a melting temperature in excess of 1000?F (538?C) 
to retain the integrity of the piping system in the event of fire 
exposure. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.1.1 — 5.1.10.4.1.3] 

1321.2 Tube Joints. Brazed tube joints shall be the socket 
type. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.1.4] 

1321.3 Filler Metals. Filler metals shall bond with and be 
metallurgically compatible with the base metals being joined. 

Filler metals shall comply with AWS A5.8. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.1.5, 5.1.10.4.1.6] 

1321.4 Copper-to-Copper Joints. Copper-to-copper 
joints shall be brazed using a copper-phosphorus or copper- 


phosphorus-silver brazing filler metal (BCuP series) without 
flux. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.1.7] 


286 


1321.5 Accessible. Joints to be brazed in place shall be 
accessible for necessary preparation, assembly, heating, filler 
application, cooling, cleaning, and inspection. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.1.9] 


1321.6 Purging. Braze joints shall be continuously purged 
with nitrogen NF. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.1.10] 


1321.7 Tube Ends. Tube ends shall be cut square using a 
sharp tubing cutter to avoid deforming the tube. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.2.1] 


1321.71 Cutting Wheels. The cutting wheels оп tub- 
ing cutters shall be free from grease, oil, or other lubri- 
cant not suitable for oxygen service. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.2.2] 


1321.72 Cut Ends. The cut ends of the tube shall be | 
rolled smooth or deburred with a sharp, clean deburring 
tool, taking care to prevent chips from entering the tube. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.2.3] 


1321.8 Cleaning Procedures. The interior surfaces of 
tubes, fittings, and other components that are cleaned for oxy- 
gen service shall be stored and handled to avoid contamina- 
tion prior to assembly and brazing. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.1] 


1321.8.1 Exterior Surfaces. The exterior surfaces of 
tube ends shall be cleaned prior to brazing to remove any 
surface oxides. When cleaning the exterior surfaces of 
tube ends, no matter shall be allowed to enter the tube. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.2, 5.1.10.4.3.3] 


1321.8.2 Interior Surfaces. If the interior surfaces of 
fitting sockets become contaminated prior to brazing, they 
shall be recleaned for oxygen in accordance with Section 
1321.8.7 and be cleaned for brazing with a clean, oil-free, 
stainless steel or brass wire brush. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.4] 


1321.8.3 Abrasive Pads. Clean, nonshedding, abra- 
sive pads shall be used to clean the exterior surfaces of 
the tube ends. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.5] 


1321.8.4 Prohibited. The use of steel wool or sand 
cloth shall be prohibited. The cleaning process shall not 
result in grooving of the surfaces to be joined. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.3.6, 5.1.10.4.3.7] 


1321.8.5 Wiped. After being abraded, the surfaces shall 
be wiped using a clean, lint-free white cloth. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.3.8] 


1321.8.6 Examination. Tubes, fittings, valves, and 
other components shall be visually examined internally 
before being joined to verify that they have not become 
contaminated for oxygen service and that they are free 
of obstructions or debris. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.9] 


1321.8.7 On-Site Recleaning. The interior surfaces 
of tube ends, fittings, and other components that were 
cleaned for oxygen service by the manufacturer, but that 
became contaminated prior to being installed, shall be 
permitted to be recleaned on-site by the installer by thor- 
oughly scrubbing the interior surfaces with a clean, hot 
water-alkaline solution, such as sodium carbonate or 
trisodium phosphate, using a solution of 1 pound (0.5 kg) 
of sodium carbonate or trisodium phosphate to 3 gallons 
(11 L) of potable water, and thoroughly rinsing them 
with clean, hot, potable water. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


Other aqueous cleaning solutions shall be permitted 
to be used for on-site recleaning permitted in this sec- 
tion, provided that they are in accordance with the 
mandatory requirements of CGA G-4.1. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.3.10, 5.1.10.4.3.11] 


1321.8.8 Contaminated Materials. Material that has 
become contaminated internally and is not clean for oxygen 
service shall not be installed. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.12] 


1321.8.9 Timeframe for Brazing. Joints shall be 
brazed within 8 hours after the surfaces are cleaned for 
brazing. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.3.13] 


1321.9 Brazing Dissimilar Metals. Flux shall only be 
used when brazing dissimilar metals, such as copper and 
bronze or brass, using a silver (BAg series) brazing filler 
metal. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.4.1] 


1321.9.1 Surface Cleaning. Surfaces shall be cleaned 
for brazing in accordance with Section 1321.8. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.4.2] 


1321.9.2 Flux. Flux shall be applied sparingly to mini- 
mize contamination of the inside of the tube with flux. 
The flux shall be applied and worked over the cleaned 
surfaces to be brazed using a stiff bristle brush to ensure 
complete coverage and wetting of the surfaces with flux. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.4.3, 5.1.10.4.4.4] 


1321.9.3 Short Sections of Copper. Where possi- 
ble, short sections of copper tube shall be brazed onto the 
non-copper component, and the interior of the sub- 
assembly shall be cleaned of flux prior to installation in 
the piping system. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.4.5] 


1321.10.5 Discharge Opening. While a joint is being 
brazed, a discharge opening shall be provided on the 
opposite side of the joint from where the purge gas is 
being introduced. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.7] 


1321.10.6 Temperature of Joint. The flow of purge 
gas shall be maintained until the joint is cool to the touch. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.8] 


1321.10.7 Opening to Be Sealed. After the joint has 
cooled, the purge discharge opening shall be sealed to 
prevent contamination of the inside of the tube and main- 
tain the nitrogen atmosphere within the piping system. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.9] 


1321.10.8 Final Brazed Connection. The final 
brazed connection of new piping to an existing pipeline 
containing the system gas shall be permitted to be made 
without the use of a nitrogen purge. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.5.10] 


1321.10.9 Final Tie-In Test. After a final brazed con- 
nection in a positive pressure medical gas pipeline is 
made without a nitrogen purge, an outlet in the immedi- 
ate downstream zone of the affected portion(s) of both 
the new and existing piping shall be tested in accordance 
with the final tie-in test in Section 1324.5.9 through Sec- 
tion 1324.5.9.4. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.11] 


1321.10.10 Autogenous Orbital Welding Process. 
When using the autogenous orbital welding process, 
joints shall be continuously purged inside and outside 
with inert gas(es) in accordance with the qualified weld- 
ing procedure. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.12] 


1321.9.4 Flux-Coated Brazing Rods. On joints 
DN20 (NPS 24) (% inch O.D.) size and smaller, flux- 
coated brazing rods shall be permitted to be used in lieu 
of applying flux to the surfaces being joined. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.4.6] 


1321.11 Assembling and Heating Brazed Joints. Tube 
ends shall be inserted into the socket, either fully or to a 
mechanically limited depth that is not less than the minimum 
cup depth (overlap) specified by ASME B16.50. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.6.1] 


1321.10 Nitrogen Purge. When brazing, joints shall be 
continuously purged with oil-free, dry nitrogen NF to prevent 
the formation of copper oxide on the inside surfaces of the 
joint. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.1] 


1321.11.1 Heating of Joint. Where flux is permitted, 
the joint shall be heated slowly until the flux has lique- 
fied. After flux is liquefied, or where flux is not permit- 
ted to be used, the joint shall be heated quickly to the 


1321.10.1 Source. The source of the purge gas shall 
be monitored, and the installer shall be audibly alerted 
when the source content is low. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.2] 


1321.10.2 Flow Rate Control. The purge gas flow rate 
shall be controlled by the use of a pressure regulator and 
flowmeter, or combination thereof. 


Pressure regulators alone shall not be used to control 
purge gas flow rates. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.3, 5.1.10.4.5.4] 


1321.10.3 Oxygen Analyzer. In order to ensure that 
all ambient air has been removed from the pipeline prior 
to brazing, an oxygen analyzer shall be used to verify the 
effectiveness of the purge. The oxygen analyzer shall 
read below 1 percent oxygen concentration before braz- 
ing begins. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.5] 


1321.10.4 During Installation. During and after 
installation, openings in the piping system shall be kept 
sealed to maintain a nitrogen atmosphere within the pip- 
ing to prevent debris or other contaminants from entering 
the system. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.5.6] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


brazing temperature, taking care not to overheat the joint. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.6.2, 5.1.10.4.6.3] 


1321.12 Inspection of Brazed Joints. After brazing, the 
outside of all joints shall be cleaned by washing with water 
and a wire brush to remove any residue and allow clear visual 
inspection of the joint. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.7.1] 
1321.12.1 Where Flux Is Used. Where flux has been 
used, the wash water shall be hot. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.4.7.2] 
1321.12.2 Visually Inspected. Each brazed joint shall 
be visually inspected after cleaning the outside surfaces. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.7.3] 
1321.12.3 Prohibited Brazed Joints. Joints exhibit- 
ing the following conditions shall not be permitted: 
(1) Flux or flux residue (when flux or flux-coated BAg 
series rods are used with dissimilar metals). 
(2) Base metal melting or erosion. 


(3) Unmelted filler metal. 


287 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(4) Failure of the filler metal to be clearly visible all the 
way around the joint at the interface between the 
socket and the tube. 


(5) Cracks in the tube or component. 
(6) Cracks in the braze filler metal. 


(7) Failure of the joint to hold the test pressure under the 
installer-performed initial pressure test (see Section 
1324.5 through Section 1324.5.1.2) and standing pres- 
sure test (see Section 1324.5.4 or Section 1324.5.5). 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.7.4] 


1321.12.4 Defective Brazed Joints. Brazed joints 
that are identified as defective under the conditions of 
Section 1321.12.3(2) or Section 1321.12.3(5) shall be 
replaced. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.7.5] 


Brazed joints that are identified as defective under the 
conditions of Section 1321.12.3(1), Section 1321.12.3(3), 
Section 1321.12.3(4), Section 1321.12.3(6) or Section 
1321.12.3(7) shall be permitted to be repaired, except that 
no joint shall be reheated more than once before being 
replaced. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.4.7.6] 


1322.0 Welded Joints. 


1322.1 Welded Joints Procedure. Welded joints for med- 
ical gas and medical-surgical vacuum systems shall be permit- 
ted to be made using a gas tungsten arc welding (GTAW) 
autogenous orbital procedure. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.1] 


1322.1.1 Welder Qualification Procedure. The 
GTAW autogenous orbital procedure and the welder qual- 
ification procedure shall be qualified in accordance with 
Section IX of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code. 
Welder qualification procedures shall include a bend test 
and a tensile test in accordance with Section IX of the 
ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code on each tube size 
diameter. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.2, 5.1.10.5.1.3] 


1322.1.2 Welding Procedure Specification. Each 
welder shall qualify to a welding procedure specification 
(WPS) for each tube diameter. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.4] 


1322.1.3 Purging of Joints. GTAW autogenous 
orbital welded joints shall be purged during welding with 
a commercially available mixture of 75 percent helium 
(+/- 5 percent) and 25 percent argon (+/- 5 percent). 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.5] 


1322.1.4 Shield Gas. The shield gas shall be as 
required in Section 1322.1.3. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.6] 


1322.1.5 Test Coupons. Test coupons shall be welded 
and inspected, as a minimum, at the start of work and 
every 4 hours thereafter, or when the machine is idle for 
more than 30 minutes, and at the end of the work period. 
Test coupons shall be inspected on the I.D. and O.D. by 
a qualified quality control inspector. Test coupons shall 
also be welded at change of operator, weld head, weld- 
ing power supply, or gas source. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.1.7 
— 5.1.10.5.1.9] 


1322.2 Welding for Stainless Tube. Stainless tube shall 
be welded using metal inert gas (MIG) welding, tungsten inert 
gas (TIG) welding, or other welding techniques suited to join- 
ing stainless tube. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.2.1] 


288 


1322.2.1 Qualifications. Welders shall be qualified to 
Section IX of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.5.2.2] 


1322.3 Memory Metal Fittings. Memory metal fittings 
having a temperature rating not less than 1000°F (538°C) and 
a pressure rating not less than 300 psi (2068 kPa) shall be per- 
mitted to be used to Join copper or stainless steel tube. Mem- 
ory metal fittings shall be installed by qualified technicians in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.6.1, 5.1.10.6.2] 


1322.4 Axially Swaged Fittings. Axially swaged fittings 
providing metal-to-metal seals, suitable for service at 300 psig 
(2070 kPa) and able to withstand a temperature of 1000°F 
(538?C) and that, when complete, are permanent and non- 
separable shall be permitted to be used to join copper or stain- 
less steel tube. Axially swaged fittings shall be installed by | 
qualified technicians in accordance with the manufacturer's 
instructions. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.7.1, 5.1.10.7.2] 

1322.5 Threaded Fittings. Threaded fittings shall meet the 

following criteria: 

(1) They shall be limited to connections for pressure and 
vacuum indicators, alarm devices, gas-specific demand 
check fittings, and source equipment on the source side 
of the source valve. 


(2) They shall be tapered pipe threads complying with 
ASME ВІ.20.1. 
(3) They shall be made up with polytetrafluoroethylene 


(PTFE) tape or other thread sealant recommended for 
oxygen service, with sealant applied to the male threads 
only and care taken to ensure sealant does not enter the 
pipe. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.8] 


1322.6 Other Types of Fittings. Listed or approved metal- 
lic gas tube fittings that, when made up, provide a permanent 
joint having the mechanical, thermal, and sealing integrity of a 
brazed joint shall be permitted to be used. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.9.1] 

1322.6.1 Dielectric Fittings. Dielectric fittings that 

comply with the following shall be permitted only where 

required by the manufacturer of special medical equip- 
ment to electrically isolate the equipment from the sys- 
tem distribution piping: 

(1) They shall be of brass or copper construction with an 
approved dielectric. 

(2) They shall be permitted to be a union. 

(3) They shall be clean for oxygen where used for med- 
ical gases and medical support gases. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.9.2] 

1322.7 Prohibited Joints. The following joints shall be 

prohibited throughout medical gas and vacuum distribution 

pipeline systems: 

(1) Flared and compression-type connections, including con- 
nections to station outlets and inlets, alarm devices, and 
other components. 

(2) Other straight-threaded connections, including unions. 


(3) Pipe-crimping tools used to permanently stop the flow 
of medical gas and vacuum piping. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(4) Removable and nonremovable push-fit fittings. that 
employ a quick assembly push fit connector. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.10] 


1323.0 Installation of Piping and Equipment. 

1323.1 Required Pipe Sizing. Piping systems shall be 
designed and sized to deliver the required flow rates at the 
utilization pressures. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.1.1] 


1323.1.1 Mains and Branches. Mains and branches 
in medical gas piping systems shall be not less than 
DNI5 (NPS 4) (4 inch О.Р.) size. Mains and branches 
in medical-surgical vacuum systems shall be not less 
than DN20 (NPS %) (% inch O.D.) size. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.1.2, 5.1.10.11.1.3] 


1323.1.2 Drops to Individual Stations. Drops to indi- 
vidual station outlets and inlets shall be not less than DN15 


inlet, to determine the total system pressure loss to 
each outlet or inlet. The total system pressure loss 
in the piping to each outlet or inlet shall not exceed 
the values specified in Table 1323.1.5(2). 


TABLE 1323.1.5(1) 
SYSTEM SIZING — FLOW REQUIREMENTS FOR 
STATION OUTLETS AND INLETS" 


(NPS 4) (% inch O.D.) size. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.1.4] 


1323.1.3 Runouts and Connecting Tubing. 
Runouts to alarm panels and connecting tubing for 
gauges and alarm devices shall be permitted to be DN8 
(NPS '4) (% inch О.Р.) size. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.1.5] 


1323.1.4 Maximum Demand. Where the maximum 
demand for each medical gas or vacuum system does not 
exceed the values in Table 1323.1.4(1) through Table 
1323.1.4(6), the size of pipe of each section of the system 
shall be determined in accordance with Section 1323.1.5. 
The size for systems beyond the range of Table 
1323.1.4(1) through Table 1323.1.4(6) shall be deter- 
mined in accordance with Section 1323.1.6. 


1323.1.5 Sizing Procedures. The size of each section 
of pipe in a system within the range of Table 1323.1.4(1) 
through Table 1324.1.4(6) shall be determined in accor- 
dance with the following: 

(1) Determine the total flow rate and number of outlets 


or inlets for each section of pipe in accordance with 
Table 1305.2 and Table 1305.3. 


NUMBER OF DIVERSITY 
MINIMUM PERMISSIBLE 
OUTLETS AND | PERCENTAGE OF SYSTEM FLOW OF ALL 
INLETS AVERAGE FLOW PRESSURIZED MEDICAL 
TERMINAL PER OUTLETS GAS SYSTEMS? 
UNITS PER AND INLETS $ 3 
FACILITY TERMINAL UNITS (standard cubic feet per minute) 
1-10 100% Actual Demand 
11-25 75% 7.0 
26—50 50% 13.1 
51—100 50% 17.5 
Notes: 


! Flow rates of station outlets and inlets in accordance with Table 1305.2. 
2 The minimum system flow is the average outlets and inlets flow times 
the number of station outlets and inlets times the diversity percentage. 


TABLE 1323.1.5(2) 
MAXIMUM PERMITTED PRESSURE LOSS IN 
MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TYPE OF SYSTEM MA кышты" 
Medical Air 5 
Nitrogen 15 
Nitrous Oxide 5 
Carbon Dioxide 5 
Oxygen 5 
Medical Vacuum 4 inches of mercury 


For SI units: 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch of mercury 


— 3.386 kPa 


(2) Measure the length of the section of pipe to each sta- 
tion outlet or inlet on the system. Multiply the meas- 
ured pipe length by 1.5 (150 percent), to account for 
the number of fittings in the system, to determine 
the pipe equivalent length. 

(3) Beginning with the most remote outlet or inlet, mul- 
tiply the total flow rate by the diversity factor spec- 
ified in Table 1323.1.5(1) for each section of pipe 


1323.1.6 Engineering Methods. For conditions other 
than those covered by Section 1323.1.4, such as longer 
runs of greater gas or vacuum demands, the size of each 
medical gas or vacuum piping system shall be deter- 
mined by standard engineering methods acceptable to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, and each system shall be 
so designed that the total pressure drop or gain between 
the source equipment and an outlet or inlet shall not 
exceed the allowable pressures shown in Table 1305.1. 


to determine the sizing flow rate for the piping. 


(4) Select Table 1323.1.4(1) through Table 1324.1.4(6) 
based on the medical gas or vacuum being trans- 


1323.2 Pipe Protection. Piping shall be protected against 


freezing, corrosion, 
99:5.1.10.11.2] 


and physical damage. 


[NFPA 


ported through the piping. 

(5) Select an estimated pipe size for determining the 
system pressure loss. Multiply the pipe equivalent 
length, for a given section of pipe, by the pressure 
loss for the sizing flow rate in the applicable table. 
Divide that number by 100 to determine the system 
pressure loss for the section of pipe. 


(6) Add the pressure loss for each section of piping, 
from the source equipment location to the outlet or 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1323.2.1 Exposed Piping. Piping exposed in corri- 
dors and other areas where subject to physical damage 
from the movement of carts, stretchers, portable equip- 
ment, or vehicles shall be protected. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.2.1] 


1323.2.2 Underground Piping. Piping underground 
within buildings or embedded in concrete floors or walls 
shall be installed in a continuous conduit. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.2.2] 


289 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1323.1.4(1) 
PRESSURE LOSS FOR MEDICAL AIR 


TABLE 1323.1.4(2) 


PRESSURE LOSS FOR NITROGEN 


PRESSURE DROP (psi) PER 100 FEET? 


FLOW RATE FLOW RATE PRESSURE DROP (psi) PER 100 FEET? 
(SCFM)' YINCH PIPE | $4INCHPIPE | 1 INCH PIPE (SCFM)! 12 INCH PIPE | 2% INCHPIPE | 1INCHPIPE 
0.35 0.004 0.001 = 5.30 0.126 0.024 " 
ол Oe 00005 5 10.59 0.430 0.082 = 
L9% 0023 0005 = 15.89 0.886 0.168 = 
1.41 0.037 0.007 = 
21.19 1.485 0.281 = 
1.77 0.055 0.011 a 
215 "S IS - 26.48 2.220 0.419 = 
247 0.097 0.019 = 31.78 3.089 0.581 => 
2.92 0.123 0.024 = 37.08 4.087 0.766 — 
3.18 0.151 0.029 E 42.37 - 0.975 - 
3.53 0.181 0.035 = 47.67 E 1.206 2 
4.24 0.249 0.048 - 52.97 = 1.460 0.361 
4.94 0.326 0.063 5 58.26 - 1.736 0.429 
5.65 0.413 0.080 = 63.56 > 2.033 0.502 
6:36 ven! 0:038 а 68.85 = 2.352 0.580 
7.06 0.611 0.118 0.030 
74.15 = 2.692 0.663 
7.77 0.723 0.139 0.035 
8.47 0.843 0.162 0.041 13:43 = 2054 0132 
9.18 0.969 0.187 0.047 84.74 Ы 3.436 0.845 
9.89 1.108 0.212 0.053 90.04 » 3.840 0.943 
10.59 1.252 0.240 0.060 95.34 = 4.264 1.046 
12.36 1.647 0.315 0.079 100.63 = 4.709 1.154 
14.12 2.090 0.398 0.100 105.93 z = 1.267 
15.89 2.580 0.490 0.123 116.52 = m 1.508 
17.66 3.116 0.591 0.148 1272 = = 1.768 
19.42 = 0.701 0.176 13771 = = 2.046 
21.19 = 0.818 0.205 14836 - К 3344 
22.95 z 0.944 0.236 
158.90 = = 2.660 
24.72 E 1.078 0.268 
2825 = 1.369 0341 1032:49 = > ლარის 
31.78 = 1.690 0.421 180.08 = Е 3.347 
35.31 E 2.043 0.509 190.67 E = 3.719 
38.84 = 2.425 0.603 201.27 - - 4.108 
42.37 = 2.838 0.705 211.86 = > 4.516 
45.90 — 3.280 0.814 222.45 ES ES 4.942 
49.43 = 3.751 0.929 233.05 Е Е " 
52.97 = 4.249 1.052 243.64 = = = 
56.50 = = 1.181 $3103 - " - 
60.03 = E 1.318 T - - - 
63.56 = = 1.461 
67.09 Е - 1.611 2192 Е Е Е 
70.62 = = 1.768 286.01 = 5 = 
8121 = = 2.276 296.60 » > = 
88.28 - = 2.647 307.20 = = = 
95.34 = = 3.044 317.79 " = S 


For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch = 25 mm, 


1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


! Based on the pressure of 14.7 psig (101 kPa) at 68?F (20?C). 
? Based on the pressure of 55 psig (379 kPa) at 68°F (20°C). 


290 


For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch = 25 mm, 


1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


! Based on the pressure of 14.7 psig (101 kPa) at 68?F (20?C). 
? Based on the pressure of 55 psig (379 kPa) at 68?F (20?C). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PRESSURE LOSS FOR NITROUS OXIDE AND CARBON DIOXIDE 


TABLE 1323.1.4(3) 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1323.1.4(4) 


PRESSURE LOSS FOR OXYGEN 


FLOW RATE PRESSURE DROP (psi) PER 100 FEET? FLOW RATE PRESSURE DROP (psi) PER 100 FEET? 
(SCFM)' 12 INCH PIPE | ?4INCHPIPE | 1INCH PIPE (SCFM)' 12 INCH PIPE | ?4INCHPIPE | 1INCH PIPE 
0.35 0.004 — = 0.35 0.004 - = 
0.71 0.014 — — 0.71 0.013 0.003 — 
1.06 0.029 z М 1.06 0.025 0.005 – 
1.41 0.047 = = 1.41 0.041 0.008 — 
1.77 0.070 = = 1.77 0.060 0.012 — 
2.12 0.096 = = 2.12 0.082 0.016 T 
2.47 0.125 i = 2.47 0.107 0.021 – 
29 0.159 E = 2.82 0.135 0.026 = 
3.18 0.195 " = 3.18 0.166 0.032 - 
3.53 0.235 0.045 - . oe 0:033 = 
4.24 0.324 0.062 = ad 9:213 0033 = 
4.94 0.425 0.081 = 4.94 0.359 0.069 Е 
5.65 0.539 0.103 E FO 0:434 0.087 i 
6.36 0.558 0.107 — 
_ жш жю C эш – « 
7.77 0.950 0.181 0.045 TEI E 053 9:032 
8.47 1.110 0.211 0.053 P шы 0112 On 
9.18 1.281 0.243 0.061 00 1:066 0-203 ne 
9.89 1.463 0.278 0.070 2:67 205 cn 0.057 
10.59 1.377 0.263 0.066 
10.59 1.656 0.314 0.079 
12.36 1.811 0.346 0.087 
12.36 2.186 0.413 0.103 
14.12 2.298 0.438 0.110 
14.12 2.752 0.525 0.131 
15.89 2.837 0.539 0.135 
15.89 3.442 0.648 0.162 17.66 3.456 0.650 0.163 
17.66 4.166 0.783 0.195 1942 — 0.771 0.193 
19.42 — 0.929 0.231 2119 8 0.900 0.225 
21.19 – 0.744 0.270 22.95 — 1.038 0.260 
22.95 — 0.858 0.312 2472 — L185 0.295 
24.72 — 0.980 0.356 2825 7 1.505 0.375 
Re) > 1595 dud 31.78 = 1.859 0.463 
31.78 — 1.537 0.560 3531 = 2247 0.559 
35.31 — 1.858 0.677 38.84 _ 2.667 0.663 
38.84 = 2.205 0.804 4237 = 3.121 0.775 
45.90 — 2.982 1.088 49.43 = 4.125 1.022 
49.43 — 3.411 1.245 52.97 = m 1.157 
52.97 = 4.249 1.411 56.50 = m 1.299 
56.50 — — 1.587 60.03 ES E 1.449 
60.03 = = 1.772 63.56 3 > 1.607 
63.56 - - 1.967 67.09 = = 1.772 
67.09 — — 2.174 70.62 — — 1.944 
70.62 — — 2.385 81.21 — — 2.503 
79.45 — — 2.959 91.81 — — 3.127 
88.28 — — 3.589 102.40 — — 3.813 


For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch =25 mm, 


1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


! Based on the pressure of 14.7 psig (101 kPa) at 68?F (20?C). 
? Based on the pressure of 55 psig (379 kPa) at 68?F (20?C). 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch = 25 mm, 
1 foot = 304.8 mm, | pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


Notes: 


' Based on pressure of 14.7 psig (101 kPa) at 68°F (20°C). 


? Based on pressure of 55 psig (379 kPa) at 68°F (20 °C). 


291 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1323.1.4(5) TABLE 1323.1.4(5) 
PRESSURE LOSS FOR VACUUM PRESSURE LOSS FOR VACUUM (continued) 
VACUUM LOSS (inch of mercury) FLOW VACUUM LOSS (inch of mercury) А 
Е PER 100 FEET FOR COPPER TUBE? RATE PER 100 FEET FOR COPPER TUBE 
(SCFM | Saien T тен | тусн | aneh. | 2 INCH conus | “type, | Tuse | тин | тв | TUBE 
49.43 – — — 3.645 0.956 
ხუა I 20013 E E E = 52.97 = = = 4.22 | 1.081 
0.71 0.061 = = = = 56.50 а = = 4626 | 1212 
1.06 0.120 — — – = 63.56 - - — — 1.495 
1.41 0.194 — — > = 70.62 = — — — 1.803 
1.77 0.284 — = = = 77.68 = = = = 2.138 
242 0387 _ > = = 84.74 -— -— – – 2.497 
91.81 — – — — 2.882 
247 | 0.504 — = & = 98.87 E = S = 3.291 
2.82 0.634 - - = B 105.93 – — – — 3.724 
318 | 0757 E E - - 11299 | — = E = 4.181 


For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch = 25 mm, 


3.53 0,932 0.238 _ = _ 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch of mercury = 3.386 kPa 


4.24 1.277 0.325 — — — Notes: 
4.94 1.669 0.424 N _ _ Е Based on the pressure of 147 psig (101 kPa) at 68°F (20°C). 

Based on the pressure of 19 inches of mercury gauge vacuum (64 kPa) 
5.65 2.106 0.534 — = = at 68°F (20°C). 


6.36 2.586 0.655 = = > 


7.06 3.110 0.787 0.272 — = 


7.77 3.674 0.929 0.321 € — 


ыы არშა IB MES = z PRESSURE loss FOR EEH CATEGORY 
9.18 4.927 1.243 0.429 - E ( 3) 
VACUUM LOSS (inch of mercury) 

9.89 - 1.416 0.488 - - oe PER 100 FEET FOR PLASTIC TUBE? 

10.59 _ 1.597 0.551 0.242 _ (SCFM)! 34 INCH 1 INCH 1'4 INCH 1'2 INCH 2 INCH 

11.30 = 1.789 0.616 0.270 = TUBE TUBE TUBE TUBE TUBE 

12.01 - 1.990 | 0.685 | 0.300 E 0.35 0.005 Е = = = 

12.71 = 2200 | 0.757 | 0.332 2 OME! ROY = E - - 

13.42 - 2419 | 0.832 | 0.365 - nee ae = = = = 
141 0.021 d > = = 

14.12 = 2.648 0.911 0.399 = 

14.83 2.886 | 0.992 | 0.435 et ы: = = = _ 

i _ | ui : 2.2 | 0.060 | 0.010 - - - 
15.54 2 3.132 1.077 0.471 = 2.47 0077 0.020 - - - 
16.24 E 3.388 1.164 | 0.510 = 282 0.096 0.005 = = = 
16.95 = 3.652 1.254 0.549 Е 3.18 0.118 0.031 0.011 = = 
17.66 z 3.925 1.348 0.590 = 3.53 0.141 0.036 0.013 - - 
18.36 m 4.207 1444 | 0.632 0.167 4.24 0.192 0.050 0.017 = = 
19.07 = 4.498 1.543 0.675 0.179 4.94 0.249 0.064 | 0.023 0.010 = 
19.77 - 4.797 | 1.646 | 0.720 | 0.190 5.65 0.313 | 0.081 | 0.028 | 0.012 - 
20.48 7 E 1751 0.766 0.202 6.36 0.383 0.099 0.035 0.015 = 
2119 _ = 1859 0813 0214 7.06 0.459 0.118 0.041 0.018 = 
AT - - T йб ТЕТ 777 0.541 0.139 0.049 0.021 = 

8.47 0.628 0.161 0.056 0.024 E 
28.25 m E 3.092 1.350 0.356 

9.18 0.722 0.185 0.065 0.027 = 
3178 _ _ 3:811 1:602 0438 9.89 0.821 0.210 0.073 0.031 - 
3531 = 5 4.596 | 2.004 | 0.527 10.59 | 0.925 | 0237 | 0.083 | 0.035 - 
38.84 E B = 2.373 0.624 11.30 1.035 0.265 0.092 | 0.039 | 0.010 
42.37 = = = 2.770 0.728 12.01 1.151 0.294 0.102 0.043 0.011 
45.90 = = = 3.194 0.838 12.71 1.270 0.324 | 0.113 0.048 0.012 


292 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1323.1.4(6) 
PRESSURE LOSS FOR VACUUM (CATEGORY 3) (continued) 


VACUUM LOSS (inch of mercury) 


iid PER 100 FEET FOR PLASTIC TUBE? 
(SCFM)! | INCH | 11NCH | 1%4INCH | 1'2INCH | 21NCH 
TUBE TUBE TUBE TUBE TUBE 


13.42 1.396 0.356 0.124 0.052 0.014 
14.12 1.525 0.389 0.135 0.057 0.015 
14.83 1.662 0.424 0.147 0.062 0.016 
15.54 1.803 0.460 0.160 0.068 0.017 
16.24 1.948 0.496 0.172 0.073 0.019 
16.95 2.099 0.535 0.186 0.078 0.020 
17.66 2.256 0.574 0.199 0.084 0.022 
18.36 2.415 0.615 0.213 0.090 0.023 
19.07 2.581 0.657 0.228 0.096 0.025 
19.77 2.750 0.699 0.243 0.102 0.026 
20.48 2.925 0.744 0.258 0.109 0.028 
21.19 3.106 0.790 0.274 0.115 0.030 
24.72 4.074 1.034 0.358 0.151 0.039 


(2) Room locations for secondary distribution circuit 
panels and breakers having a maximum voltage rat- 
ing of 600 volts [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.3.2] 


1323.3.2 Approved Locations. Medical gas piping 
shall be permitted to be installed in the same service 
trench or tunnel with fuel gas lines, fuel oil lines, elec- 
trical lines, steam lines, and similar utilities, provided 
that the space is ventilated (naturally or mechanically) 
and the ambient temperature around the medical gas pip- 
ing is limited to 130°F (54°C) maximum. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.3.3] 
1323.3.3 Prohibited Contact with Oil. Medical gas 
piping shall not be located where subject to contact with 
oil, including a possible flooding area in the case of a 
major oil leak. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.3.4] 

1323.4 Pipe Support. Piping shall be supported from the 

building structure. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.1] 


1323.4.1 Hangers and Supports. Hangers and sup- 
ports shall comply with and be installed in accordance 
with MSS SP-58. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.2] 


2825 Е 1.307 0.452 0.190 0.049 1323.4.2 Copper Tube. Supports for copper tube shall 
31.78 - 1.608 | 0.556 | 0.234 | 0.060 be sized for copper tube. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.3] 
3531 Е 1.936 0.669 0.281 0.072 1323.4.3 Damp Locations. In potentially damp loca- 
38.84 а 2,291 0.791 0.332 0.085 tions, copper tube hangers or supports that аге in contact 
42.37 - 2.672 0.922 0.387 0.099 with the tube shall be plastic-coated or otherwise be elec- 
45.90 = 3.078 1.062 0.446 0.113 trically insulated from the tube by a material that will not 
49.43 E 3.510 1211 0.508 0.129 absorb moisture. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.5] 
spacing shall be in accordance with Table 1323.4.4. 
56.50 = 4.450 1.534 0.643 0.163 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.6] 
63.56 = = 1.890 0.792 0.201 
70.62 = = 2.278 0.954 0.242 ТАВГЕ 1323.4.4 
77.68 = = 2.699 1.130 0.286 MAXIMUM PIPE SUPPORT SPACING 
84.74 S " 3151 | 1318 | 0334 [NFPA 99: TABLE 5.1.10.11.4.6] 
= = HANGER 

91.81 3.634 1.520 0.385 PIPE SIZE SPACING 
98.87 = = 4.148 1.734 0.439 (feet) 
105.93 = = 4.691 1.961 0.496 DN8 (NPS М) Q^ of an inch О.Р.) 5 
112.99 = = Е 2.200 0.556 DN10 (NPS %) (% of an inch O.D.) 6 

For SI units: 1 standard cubic foot per minute = 28.32 SLPM, 1 inch = 25 mm, DNI5 (NPS 4) (% of an inch O.D.) 6 

1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch of mercury = 3.386 kPa DN20 (NPS %) (% of an inch O.D.) 7 

Notes: DN25 (NPS 1) | (1% of an inch O.D.) 8 
Based on the pressure of 14.7 psig (101 kPa) at 68°F (20°C). 1 3 : 

? Based on the pressure of 19 inches of mercury gauge vacuum (64 kPa) at BN (NPS 179. | (1% of an inch O.D.) 2 
68°F (20°C). DN40and | NPS 114) | (13% ofan inch О.Р.) 10 

larger 
1323.3 Location of Piping. Piping risers shall be permit- Vertical risers, all sizes, every floor, but not to 15 
ted to be installed in pipe shafts if protected from physical exceed 


damage, effects of excessive heat, corrosion, or contact with 
oil. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.3.1] 


1323.3.1 Prohibited Locations. Piping shall not be 
installed in kitchens, stairwells, elevator shafts, elevator 
machine rooms, areas with open flames, electrical serv- 
ice equipment over 600 volts, and areas prohibited Cal- 
ifornia Electrical Code except for the following locations: 


(1) Room locations for medical air compressor supply 
systems and medical-surgical vacuum pump supply 
systems 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


1323.4.5 Seismic Provisions. Where required, med- 

ical gas and vacuum piping shall be seismically 

restrained against earthquakes in accordance with the 

applicable building code. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.4.7] 
1323.5 Frost Protection. Buried piping outside of build- 
ings shall be installed below the local level of frost penetra- 
tion. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.1] 


293 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1323.5.1 Backfilling and Trenching. The installa- 
tion procedure for underground piping shall protect the 
piping from physical damage while being backfilled. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.2] 


1323.5.2 Conduit, Cover, or Enclosure. If under- 
ground piping is protected by a conduit, cover, or other 
enclosure, the following requirements shall be met: 


(1) Access shall be provided at the joints for visual 
inspection and leak testing. 


(2) The conduit, cover, or enclosure shall be self-drain- 
ing and not retain groundwater in prolonged contact 
with the pipe. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.3] 


1323.5.3 Excessive Stresses. Buried piping that will 
be subject to surface loads shall be buried at a depth that 
will protect the piping or its enclosure from excessive 
stresses. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.4] 


1323.5.4 Minimum Backfill. The minimum backfilled 
cover above the top of the pipe or its enclosure for buried 
piping outside of buildings shall be 36 inches (914 mm), 
except that the minimum cover shall be permitted to be 
reduced to 18 inches (457 mm) where there is no poten- 
tial for damage from surface loads or surface conditions. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.5] 


1323.5.5 Trenches. Trenches shall be excavated so that 
the pipe or its enclosure has firm, substantially continu- 
ous bearing on the bottom of the trench. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.5.6] 


1323.5.6 Composition of Backfill. Backfill shall be 
clean, free from material that can damage the pipe, and 
compacted. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.7] 


1323.5.7 Marker. A continuous tape or marker placed 
immediately above the pipe or its enclosure shall clearly 
identify the pipeline by specific name. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.5.8] 


1323.5.8 Warning. A continuous warning means shall 
also be provided above the pipeline at approximately 
one-half the depth of burial. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.9] 


1323.5.9 Wall Sleeve. Where underground piping is 
installed through a wall sleeve, the outdoor end of the 
sleeve shall be sealed to prevent the entrance of ground- 
water into the building. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.5.10] 


1323.6 Connectors. Hose and flexible connectors, both 
metallic and nonmetallic, shall be no longer than necessary 
and shall not penetrate or be concealed in walls, floors, ceil- 
ings, or partitions. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.6.1] 
1323.6.1 Flexible Connectors. Flexible connectors, 
metallic or nonmetallic, shall have a minimum burst 
pressure, with a gauge pressure of 1000 psi (6895 kPa). 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.6.2] 
1323.6.2 Metallic Flexible Joints. Metallic flexible 
joints shall be permitted in the pipeline where required 
for expansion joints, seismic protection, thermal expan- 
sion, or vibration control and shall be as follows: 
(1) For all wetted surfaces, made of bronze, copper, or 
stainless steel. 


294 


(2) Cleaned at the factory for oxygen service and 
received on the job site with certification of cleanli- 
ness. 


(3) Suitable for service at 300 psig (2068 kPa) or above 
and able to withstand temperatures of 1000?F 
(538?C). 

(4) Provided with brazing extensions to allow brazing 
into the pipeline per Section 1321.0. 


(5) Supported with pipe hangers and supports as 
required for their additional weight. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.6.3] 


1323.7 Prohibited System Interconnections. Two or 
more medical gas or vacuum piping systems shall not be 
interconnected for installation, testing, or any other reason 
except as permitted by Section 1323.7.1. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.7.1] 


1323.7.1 Medical Gas and Medical Vacuum. Med- 
ical gas and vacuum systems with the same contents shall 
be permitted to be interconnected with an inline valve 
installed between the systems. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.7.2] 


1323.72 Leak Testing. Leak testing shall be accom- 
plished by separately charging and testing each individ- 
ual piping system. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.7.3] 


1323.8 Manufacturer’s Instructions. The installation of 
individual components shall be made in accordance with the 
instructions of the manufacturer. Manufacturer’s instructions 
shall include directions and information deemed by the man- 
ufacturer to be adequate for attaining proper operation, test- 
ing, and maintenance of the medical gas and vacuum systems. 
Copies of the manufacturer’s instructions shall be left with 
the system owner. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.8.1 — 5.1.10.11.8.3] 


1323.9 Changes in System Use. Where a positive-pres- 
sure medical gas piping distribution system originally used 
or constructed for use at one pressure and for one gas is con- 
verted for operation at another pressure or for another gas, all 
provisions of Section 1318.0 through Section 1323.12 shall 
apply as if the system were new. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.9.1] 


1323.9.1 Medical Vacuum System. A vacuum sys- 
tem shall not be permitted to be converted for use as a 
gas system. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.9.2] 


1323.10 Qualifications of Installers. The installation of 
medical gas and vacuum systems shall be made by qualified, 
competent technicians who are experienced in performing such 
installations, including all personnel who actually install the 
piping system. Installers of medical gas and vacuum piped dis- 
tribution systems, all appurtenant piping supporting pump and 
compressor source systems, and appurtenant piping support- 
ing source gas manifold systems not including permanently 
installed bulk source systems, shall be certified in accordance 
with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6010. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.10.1, | 
5.1.10.11.10.2] 


1323.10.1 Brazing. Brazing shall be performed by 
individuals who are qualified in accordance with Section 
1323.11. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.10.5] 

1323.10.2 Documentation. Prior to any installation 
work, the installer of medical gas and vacuum piping 
shall provide and maintain documentation on the job site 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


for the qualification of brazing procedures and individual 
brazers that is required under Section 1323.11. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.10.6] 


1323.10.3 Health Care Organization Personnel. 
Health care organization personnel shall be permitted to 
install piping systems if all of the requirements of Section 
1323.10 are met during the installation. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.10.7] 


1323.11 Qualification of Brazing Procedures and 
Brazing. Brazing procedures and brazer performance for the 
installation of medical gas and vacuum piping shall be quali- 
fied in accordance with either Section IX, “Welding and Braz- 
ing Qualifications,” of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel 
Code, or AWS B2.2, both as modified by Section 1323.11.1 
through Section 1323.11.4. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.11.1] 


1323.11.1 Examination. Brazers shall be qualified by 
visual examination of the test coupon followed by sec- 
tioning. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.11.2] 


1323.11.2 Brazing Procedure Specification. The 
brazing procedure specification shall address cleaning, 
joint clearance, overlap, internal purge gas, purge gas 
flow rate, and filler metal. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.11.3] 


1323.11.3 Documentation. The brazing procedure 
qualification record and the record of brazer performance 
qualification shall document filler metal used, base met- 
als, cleaning, joint clearance, overlap, internal purge gas 
and flow rate during brazing of coupon, and absence of 
internal oxidation in the completed coupon. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.11.4] 


1323.11.4 Procedures. Brazing procedures qualified 
by a technically competent group or agency shall be per- 
mitted under the following conditions: 


(1) The brazing procedure specification and the proce- 
dure qualification records meet the requirements of 
this code. 


(2) The employer obtains a copy of both the brazing 
procedure specification and the supporting qualifi- 
cation records from the group or agency and signs 
and dates these records, thereby accepting responsi- 
bility for the qualifications that were performed by 
the group or agency. 

(3) The employer qualifies at least one brazer follow- 
ing each brazing procedure specification used. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.11.5] 


1323.11.5 Conditions of Acceptance. An employer 
shall be permitted to accept brazer qualification records 
of a previous employer under the following conditions: 


(1) The brazer has been qualified following the same or 
an equivalent procedure that the new employer uses. 


(2) The new employer obtains a copy of the record of 
brazer performance qualification tests from the pre- 
vious employer and signs and dates these records, 
thereby accepting responsibility for the qualifica- 
tions performed by the previous employer. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.11.6] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1323.11.6 Qualifications. Performance qualifications of 
brazers shall remain in effect indefinitely, unless the brazer 
does not braze with the qualified procedure for a period 
exceeding 6 months or there is a specific reason to question 
the ability of the brazer. [NFPA 99:5.1.10.11.11.7] 


1323.12 Breaching or Penetrating Medical Gas Pip- 
ing. Positive pressure patient medical gas piping and med- 
ical support gas piping shall not be breached or penetrated by 
any means or process that will result in residual copper par- 
ticles or other debris remaining in the piping or affect the oxy- 
gen-clean interior of the piping. The breaching or penetrating 
process shall ensure that any debris created by the process 
remains contained within the work area. [NFPA 
99:5.1.10.11.12.1, 5.1.10.11.12.2] 
1323.13 Labeling, Identification and Operating Pres- 
sure. Color and pressure requirements shall be in accordance 
with Table 1305.1. [NFPA 99:5.1.11] 
1323.13.1 Pipe Labeling. Piping shall be labeled by 
stenciling or adhesive markers that identify the patient 
medical gas, the medical support gas, or the vacuum sys- 
tem and include the following: 


(1) Name of the gas or vacuum system or the chemical 
symbol per Table 1305.1. 

(2) Gas or vacuum system color code per Table 1305.1. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.11.1.1] 


1323.13.2 Pipe Pressure Labeling. Where positive 
pressure gas piping systems operate at pressures other 
than the standard gauge pressure in Table 1305.1, the 
operating pressure in addition to the name of the gas shall 
be labeled. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.1.2] 

1323.13.3 Location of Pipe Labeling. Pipe labels «< 
shall be located as follows: 


(1) At intervals of not more than 20 feet (6096 mm). 
(2) Atleast once in or above every room. 
(3) On both sides of walls or partitions penetrated by 
the piping. 
(4) At least once in every story height traversed by ris- 
ers. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.1.4] 
1323.13.4 Paint. Medical gas piping shall not be < 
painted. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.1.5] 
1323.14 Identification of Shutoff Valves. Shutoff valves 
shall be identified with the following: 
(1) Name or chemical symbol for the specific medical gas 
or vacuum system 
(2) Gas or vacuum system color code in accordance with 
Table 1305.1 
(3) Room or areas served I 
(4) Caution to not close or open the valve except in emer- | 
gency [NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.1] 


1323.14.1 Nonstandard Operating Pressures. 
Where positive pressure gas piping systems operate at 
pressures other than the standard gauge pressure of 50 psi 
(345 kPa) to 55 psi (379 kPa) or a gauge pressure of 160 


295 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


psi (1103 kPa) to 185 psi (1276 kPa) for nitrogen or instru- 
ment air, the valve identification shall also include the non- 
standard operating pressure. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.2] 


1323.14.2 Source Valves. Source valves shall be 
labeled in substance as follows: 


SOURCE VALVE 
FOR THE (SOURCE NAME) 
[NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.4] 


1323.14.3 Main Line Valves. Main line valves shall be 
labeled in substance as follows: 


MAIN LINE VALVE FOR THE 
(GAS/VACUUM NAME) 
SERVING (NAME OF THE BUILDING) 
[NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.5] 


1323.14.4 Riser Valves. The riser valve(s) shall be 
labeled in substance as follows: 


RISER FOR THE (GAS/VACUUM NAME) 
SERVING (NAME OF THE AREA/BUILDING 
SERVED BY THE PARTICULAR RISER) 
[NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.6] 


1323.14.5 Service Valves. The service valve(s) shall 
be labeled in substance as follows: 


SERVICE VALVE FOR THE 
(GAS/VACUUM NAME) SERVING 
(NAME OF THE AREA/BUILDING 

SERVED BY THE PARTICULAR VALVE) 
[NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.7] 


1323.14.6 Zone Valve Box. Zone valve box assem- 
blies shall be labeled with the rooms, areas, or spaces that 
they control as follows: 
ZONE VALVES FOR THE 
(GAS/VACUUM NAME) 

SERVING (NAME OF ROOMS OR SPACES 
SERVED BY THE PARTICULAR VALVE) 
Labeling shall either be visible from outside the 

zone valve box assembly through the cover or be repli- 
cated on the outside, but not affixed to the removable 
cover. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.2.8] 
1323.15 Identification. Station outlets and inlets shall be 
identified as to the name or chemical symbol for the specific 
medical gas or vacuum provided and shall include the fol- 
lowing: 
(1) Name ofthe gas or vacuum system or the chemical sym- 
bol in accordance with Table 1305.1 


(2) Gas or vacuum system color code in accordance with 
Table 1305.1 


296 


In sleep labs, where the outlet is downstream of a flow 
control device, the station outlet identification shall include a 
warning not to use the outlet for ventilating patients. 


Where medical gas systems operate at pressures other 
than the standard gauge pressure of 50 psi to 55 psi (345 kPa 
to 380 kPa) or a gauge pressure of 160 psi to 185 psi (1103 
kPa to 1275 kPa) for nitrogen, the station outlet identification 
shall include the nonstandard operating pressure in addition to 
the name of the gas. [NFPA 99:5.1.11.3.1 — 5.1.11.3.2] 


1324.0 Performance Criteria and Testing Category 1 
(Gases, Medical Surgical Vacuum). 


1324.1 Where Required. Inspection and testing shall be 
performed on components, or portions thereof, of new, piped 
medical gas or vacuum systems, additions, renovations, tem- 
porary installations, or repaired systems in accordance with 
Section 1324.2 through Section 1324.5.11, and certified in 
accordance with Section 1306.0. 


1324.2 Breached Systems. All systems that are breached 
and components that are subject to additions, renovations, or 
replacement (e.g., new gas sources: bulk, manifolds, com- 
pressors, dryers, alarms) shall be inspected and tested. Sys- 
tems shall be deemed breached at the point of pipeline 
intrusion by physical separation or by system component 
removal, replacement, or addition. Breached portions of the 
systems subject to inspection and testing shall be confined to 
only the specific altered zone and components in the imme- 
diate zone or area that is located upstream for vacuum sys- 
tems and downstream for pressure gases at the point or area 
of intrusion. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.1.3 — 5.1.12.1.5] 


1324.2.1 Reports. The inspection and testing reports 
shall be submitted directly to the party that contracted 
for the testing, who shall submit the report through chan- 
nels to the responsible facility authority and any others 
that are required. Reports shall contain detailed listings of 
all findings and results. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.1.6, 5.1.12.1.7] 


1324.3 Test Gas. The test gas shall be oil-free, dry nitrogen 
NF. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.1.2] 


1324.4 Initial Piping Blowdown. Piping in medical gas and 
vacuum distribution systems shall be blown clear by means of 
oil-free, dry nitrogen NF after installation of the distribution 
piping but before installation of station outlet/inlet rough-in 
assemblies and other system components (e.g., pressure/vac- 
uum alarm devices, pressure/vacuum indicators, pressure relief 
valves, manifolds, source equipment). [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.2] 


1324.5 Initial Pressure Tests — Medical Gas and Vac- 

uum Systems. Each section of the piping in medical gas 

and vacuum systems shall be pressure tested. Initial pressure 

tests shall be conducted as follows: 

(1) After blowdown of the distribution piping. 

(2) After installation of station outlet/inlet rough-in assem- 
blies. 

(3) Prior to the installation of components of the distribution 
piping system that would be damaged by the test pres- 
sure (e.g., pressure/vacuum alarm devices, pressure/vac- 


uum indicators, line pressure relief valves). [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.3.1, 5.1.12.2.3.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1324.5.1 Shutoff Valve. The source shutoff valve shall 
remain closed during tests specified in Section 1324.5 
through Section 1324.5.1.2. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.3.3] 


1324.5.1.1 Required Test Pressure. The test 
pressure for pressure gases and vacuum systems 
shall be 1.5 times the system operating pressure but 
not less than a gauge pressure of 150 psi (1034 kPa). 
The test pressure shall be maintained until each joint 
has been examined for leakage by means of a leak 
detectant that is safe for use with oxygen and does 
not contain ammonia. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.3.4, 
5.1.12.2.3.5] 


1324.5.1.2 Leaks. Leaks, if any, shall be located, 
repaired (if permitted), replaced (1f required), and 
retested. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.3.6] 
1324.5.2 Initial Cross-Connection Test. It shall be 
determined that no cross-connections exist between the 
various medical gas and vacuum piping systems. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.4] 


1324.5.2.1 Atmospheric Pressure. All piping 
systems shall be reduced to atmospheric pressure. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.4.1] 


1324.5.2.2 Sources of Test Gas. Sources of test 
gas shall be disconnected from all piping systems, 
except for the one system being tested. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.4.2] 


1324.5.2.3 System to Be Charged. The system 
under test shall be charged with oil-free, dry nitro- 
gen NF to a gauge pressure of 50 psi (345 kPa). 
[NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.4.3] 


1324.5.2.4 Check Outlets and Inlets. After the 
installation of the individual faceplates with appro- 
priate adapters matching outlet/inlet labels, each indi- 
vidual outlet/inlet in each installed medical gas and 
vacuum piping system shall be checked to determine 
that the test gas is being dispensed only from the pip- 
ing system being tested. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.4.4] 


1324.5.2.5 Repeat Test. The cross-connection 
test referenced in Section 1324.5.2 shall be repeated 
for each installed medical gas and vacuum piping 
system. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.4.5] 


1324.5.2.6 Identification of System. The proper 
labeling and identification of system outlets/inlets 
shall be confirmed during these tests. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.4.6] 


1324.5.3 Initial Piping Purge Tests. The outlets in 
each medical gas piping system shall be purged to 
remove any particulate matter from the distribution pip- 
ing. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.5] 


1324.5.3.1 Procedure. Using appropriate 
adapters, each outlet shall be purged with an inter- 
mittent high-volume flow of test gas until the purge 
produces no discoloration in a clean white cloth. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.5.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1324.5.3.2 Location. The purging required in 
Section 1324.5.3.1 shall be started at the closest out- 
let/inlet to the zone valve and continue to the fur- 
thest outlet/inlet within the zone. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.5.2] 


1324.5.4 Standing Pressure Tests — for Positive 
Pressure Medical Gas Piping Systems. After suc- 
cessful completion of the initial pressure tests under Sec- 
tion 1324.5 through Section 1324.5.1.2, medical gas 
distribution piping shall be subjected to a standing pres- 
sure test. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6] 


1324.5.4.1 Time Frame for Testing. Tests shall 
be conducted after the final installation of station 
outlet valve bodies, faceplates, and all other distri- 
bution system components. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.1] 


1324.5.4.2 Source Valve. The source valve shall 
be closed during this test. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.2] 


1324.5.4.3 Length of Testing. The piping sys- 
tems shall be subjected to a 24-hour standing pres- 
sure test using oil-free, dry nitrogen NF. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.6.3] 


1324.5.4.4 Test Pressure. Test pressures shall be 
20 percent above the normal system operating line 
pressure. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.4] 


1324.5.4.5 Conclusion of Test. The leakage over 
the 24-hour test shall not exceed 0.5 percent of the | 
starting pressure [e.g., 0.3 psi (2 kPa) starting at 60 psig 
(414 kPa)] except that attributed to specific changes in | 
ambient temperature. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.5] 


1324.5.4.6 Leaks. Leaks, if any, shall be located, 
repaired (if permitted) or replaced (if required), and 
retested. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.6] 

1324.5.4.7 Proof of Testing. The 24-hour standing 
pressure test of the positive pressure system shall be 
witnessed by an ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020 inspector, 
an ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030 verifier, or the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction or its designee. A form indi- 
cating that this test has been performed and witnessed 
shall be provided to the verifier at the start of the tests 
required in Section 1324.5.7 through Section 
1324.5.11. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.6.7] 


1324.5.5 Standing Pressure Tests — Medical Vac- 
uum Piping Systems. After successful completion of 
the initial pressure tests under Section 1324.5 through Sec- 
tion 1324.5.1.2, vacuum distribution piping shall be sub- 
jected to a standing vacuum test. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7] 


1324.5.5.1 Timeframe for Testing. Tests shall 
be conducted after installation of all components of 
the vacuum system. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.1] 
1324.5.5.2 Length of Testing. The piping sys- 
tems shall be subjected to a 24-hour standing vac- 
uum test. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.2] 

1324.5.5.3 Test Pressure. Test pressure shall be 
between 12 inches (305 mm) HgV and full vacuum. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.3] 


297 


1324.5.5.4 Disconnection of Testing Source. 
During the test, the source of test vacuum shall be 
disconnected from the piping system. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.2.7.4] 


1324.5.5.5 Conclusion of Test. The leakage over 
the 24-hour test shall not exceed 0.5 percent of the 
starting pressure [e.g., 0.125 inch (0.3 mm) HgV 
starting at 25 inches (635 mm) HgV] except that 
attributed to specific changes in ambient tempera- 
ture. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.5] 


1324.5.5.6 Proof of Testing. The 24-hour standing 
pressure test ofthe vacuum system shall be witnessed 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction or its designee. 
A form indicating that this test has been performed 
and witnessed shall be provided to the verifier at the 
start of the tests required in Section 1324.5.7 through 
Section 1324.5.11. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.6] 


1324.5.5.7 Leaks. Leaks, if any, shall be located, 
repaired (if permitted) or replaced (if required), and 
retested. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.2.7.7] 
1324.5.6 System Inspection. System inspections 
shall be performed prior to concealing piping distribu- 
tion systems in walls, ceilings, chases, trenches, under- 
ground, or otherwise hidden from view. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.3.1.1] 


1324.5.6.1 Test Gas. The test gas shall be nitrogen 
NF. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.3.1.2] 


1324.5.6.2 Inspection Qualification. Inspections 
shall be conducted by a party technically competent 
and experienced in the field of medical gas and vac- 
uum pipeline inspections and testing and meeting the 
requirements of ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020, or 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.3.1.3] 


1324.5.6.3 Inspection Personnel. Inspections 
shall be performed by a party other than the 
installing contractor. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.3.1.4] 


1324.5.6.4 Qualifications. Where systems have 
not been installed by inhouse personnel, inspections 
shall be permitted by personnel of the organization 
who meet the requirements of Section 1324.5.6.2. 
[NFPA 99:5.1.12.3.1.5] 


1324.5.6.5 Inspections. The initial pressure tests 
performed by the installing contractor shall be wit- 
nessed by an ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020 inspector, 
an ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030 verifier, or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction or its designee. A 
form indicating that this test has been performed and 
witnessed shall be provided to the verifier at the start 
of the tests required in Section 1324.5.7 through 
Section 1324.5.11. The presence and correctness of 
labeling and valve tagging required by this code for 
all concealed components and piping distribution 
systems shall be inspected. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.3.2 — 
5.1.12.3.2.2] 


1324.5.7 System Verification. Verification tests shall 
be performed only after all tests required in Section 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1324.3 through Section 1324.5.5.7, Installer Performed 
Tests, have been completed. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.1.1] 


1324.5.7.1 Test Gas. The test gas shall be oil-free, 
dry nitrogen NF or the system gas where permitted. 
[NFPA 5.1.12.4.1.2] 


1324.5.7.2 Approved Tester. Testing shall be 
conducted by a party technically competent and 
experienced in the field of medical gas and vacuum 
pipeline testing and meeting the requirements of 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030, except as required by | 
Section 1324.5.7.3. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.1.3] 


Testing shall be performed by a party other than 
the installing contractor. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.1.5] 


Where systems have not been installed by in- 
house personnel, testing shall be permitted by per- 
sonnel of that organization who meet the 
requirements of Section 1324.5.7.2. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.4.1.6] 


1324.5.73 Cryogenic Fluid Testing. Testing of 
the cryogenic fluid central supply system shall be 
conducted by a party technically competent and expe- 
rienced in the field of cryogenic fluid systems and 
meeting the requirements of ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI | 
6035, in accordance with the mandatory requirements 
in CGA M-1. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.1.4] 


1324.5.8 Particulate Matter. In order to remove any 
traces of particulate matter deposited in the pipelines as 
a result of construction, a heavy, intermittent purging of 
the pipeline shall be done. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.6] 


1324.5.9 Final Tie-In Test. Each joint in the final con- 
nection between the new work and the existing system 
shall be leak-tested with the gas of system designation at 
the normal operating pressure by means of a leak detec- 
tant that is safe for use with oxygen and does not contain 
ammonia. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.9.2] 


1324.5.9.1 Vacuum Joints. Vacuum joints shall 
be tested using an ultrasonic leak detector or other 
means that will allow detection of leaks in an active 
vacuum system. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.9.3] 


1324.5.9.2 Pressure Gases. For pressure gases, 
immediately after the final brazed connection is 
made and leak-tested, an outlet in the new piping 
and an outlet in the existing piping that are immedi- 
ately downstream from the point or area of intrusion 
shall be purged in accordance with the applicable 
requirements of Section 1324.5.8. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.4.9.4] 


1324.5.9.3 Positive Pressure Gases. Before 
the new work is used for patient care, positive pres- 
sure gases shall be tested for operational pressure 
and gas concentration in accordance with Section 
1324.5.10 and Section 1324.5.11. [NFPA 
99:5.1.12.4.9.5] 


1324.5.9.4 Permanent Records. Permanent 
records of these tests shall be maintained in accor- 
dance with NFPA 99. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.9.6] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


1324.5.10 Operational Flow Pressure Drop Test. 
Operational flow pressure drop tests shall be performed 
at each station outlet/inlet or terminal where the user 
makes connections and disconnections. [NFPA 99: 
5.1.12.4.10] 


1324.5.10.1 Medical-Surgical Vacuum Inlets. 
Medical-surgical vacuum inlets shall draw 3 SCFM 
(85 Nl/min) without reducing the vacuum pressure 
below 12 inch (305 mm) gauge HgV at any adjacent 
station inlet. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.10.4] 


1324.5.10.2 Oxygen and Medical Air Outlets. 
Oxygen and medical air outlets serving Category 1 
space shall allow a transient flow rate of 6 SCFM 
(170 SLPM) for 3 seconds. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.10.5] 

1324.5.11 Medical Gas Concentration Test. After 

purging each system with the gas of system designation, 

the following shall be performed: 

(1) Each pressure gas source and outlet shall be ana- 
lyzed for concentration of gas, by volume. 

(2) Analysis shall be conducted with instruments 
designed to measure the specific gas dispensed. 


(3) Allowable concentrations shall be as indicated in 
Table 1324.5.11. [NFPA 99:5.1.12.4.11] 


TABLE 1324.5.11 


GAS CONCENTRATIONS 
[NFPA 99: TABLE 5.1.12.4.11] 
MEDICAL GAS CONCENTRATION 
Oxygen USP >99% oxygen 
Oxygen 93 USP 29096 oxygen <96% 
Nitrous oxide USP >99% nitrous oxide 
Nitrogen NF <1% oxygen or 299% nitrogen 
Medical air USP 19.5% - 23.5% oxygen 
Other gases Named gases by +1%, or per specification 


Part Ill - Category 2 Piped Gas and 
Vacuum Systems. 


1325.0 Category 2 Piped Gas and Vacuum Systems. 
1325.1 General. Category 2 piped gas or piped vacuum sys- 
tem requirements shall be permitted when all of the follow- 
ing criteria are met: 


(1) Only moderate sedation (as defined in Chapter 2), mini- 
mal sedation (as defined in Chapter 2); or no sedation 1s 
performed. Deep sedation and general anesthesia shall 
not be permitted. 


(2) The loss of the piped gas or piped vacuum systems is 
likely to cause minor injury to patients, staff, or visitors. 

(3) The facility piped gas or piped vacuum systems are 
intended for Category 2 patient care space as defined in 
Chapter 2. [NFPA 99:5.2.1.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1325.2 Nature of Hazards of Gas and Vacuum Sys- 
tems. The requirement of Section 1307.2 shall apply to the 
nature of hazards of gas and vacuum systems. [NFPA 
99:5.2.2] 


1325.3 Central Supply Systems. Category 2 systems 
shall comply with Section 1307.3 through Section 1309.13. 
[NFPA 99:5.2.3.4] 


1325.4 Category 2 Medical Air Supply Systems. Cat- 
egory 2 systems shall comply with Section 1310.0 through 
Section 1311.6, except as follows: 


(1) Medical air compressors, dryers, aftercoolers, filters, and 
regulators shall be permitted to be simplex. 

(2) The facility staff shall develop their emergency plan to 
deal with the loss of medical air. [NFPA 99:5.2.3.5] 


1325.5 Oxygen Concentrators. Oxygen supply systems 
using concentrators shall be permitted to consist of two 
sources, one of which shall be a cylinder header with suffi- 
cient cylinder connections for one average day's supply. 
[NFPA 99:5.2.3.6] 


1325.6 Category 2 Medical-Surgical Vacuum. Cate- 
gory 2 systems shall comply with Section 1312.0 through 
Section 1313.5, except as follows: 


(1) Medical-surgical vacuum systems shall be permitted to 
be simplex. 

(2) The facility staff shall develop their emergency plan to 
deal with the loss of medical-surgical vacuum. [NFPA 
99:5.2.3.7] 


1325.7 Valves. Category 2 systems shall comply with Sec- 
tion 1314.0 through Section 1314.12.1. [NFPA 99:5.2.4] 


1325.8 Station Outlets and Inlets. Category 2 systems 
shall comply with Section 1315.0. [NFPA 99:5.2.5] 


1325.9 Pressure and Vacuum Indicators. Category 2 
systems shall comply with Section 1316.2. [NFPA 99:5.2.8] 


1325.10 Warning Systems. Warning systems associated | 
with Category 2 systems shall provide the master, area, and 
local alarm functions of a Category 1 system as required in 
Section 1317.0, except as follows: 


(1) Warning systems shall be permitted to be a single alarm 
panel. 


(2) The alarm panel shall be located in an area of continuous 
surveillance while the facility is in operation. 


(3) Pressure and vacuum switches/sensors shall be mounted 
at the source equipment with a pressure indicator at the 
master alarm panel. [NFPA 99:5.2.9] 


1325.11 Category 2 Distribution. Category 2 systems | 
shall comply with Section 1318.0 through Section 1323.12. 
[NFPA 99:5.2.10] 


1325.12 Labeling and Identification. Category 2 sys- 
tems shall comply with Section 1323.13 through Section 
1323.15. [NFPA 99:5.2.11] 


1325.13 Performance Criteria and Testing — Gas, 
Medical-Surgical Vacuum, and WAGD. Category 2 sys- 
tems shall comply with Section 1324.0. [NFPA 99:5.2.12] 


299 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


Part IV — Category 3 Piped Gas and 
Vacuum Systems. 


1326.0 Category 3 Piped Gas and Vacuum Systems. 


1326.1 General. Category 3 piped gas and vacuum systems 
shall be permitted when all of the following criteria are met: 


(1) Only minimal sedation, as defined in Chapter 2; or no 
sedation is performed. Deep sedation, moderate sedation, 
and general anesthesia are not performed. 


(2) The loss of the piped gas and vacuum systems is not 
likely to cause injury to patients, staff, or visitors, but can 
cause discomfort. 

(3) The facility piped gas and vacuum systems are intended 

| for Category 3 patient care rooms as defined in Chapter 
2. [NFPA 99:5.3.1.2] 

1326.2 Nature of Hazards of Gas and Vacuum Sys- 

tems. The requirement of Section 1307.2 shall apply to the 

nature of hazards of gas and vacuum systems. [NFPA 
99:5.3.2] 

1326.3 Medical Air Supply Systems. Category 3 central 

supply systems shall be permitted to consist of the following: 

(1) Gas cylinder or cryogenic liquid container headers in 
accordance with NFPA 99. 

(2) Oxygen concentrator supply units in accordance with 
NFPA 99. 

(3) Cylinder manifolds for gas cylinders in accordance with 
NFPA 99. 

(4) Manifolds for cryogenic liquid containers in accordance 
with NFPA 99. 

(5) Cryogenic fluid central supply systems in accordance 
with NFPA 99. 


(6) Medical air compressor systems in accordance with 
NFPA 99. 


(7) Proportioning air systems in accordance with NFPA 99. 

(8) Medical-surgical vacuum systems in accordance with of 
NFPA 99. 

(9) Waste anesthetic gas disposal systems (WAGDs) in 
accordance with NFPA 99. 

(10) Instrument air compressor systems in accordance with 
NFPA 99. {NFPA 99:5.3.3.5} 

1326.4 Medical-Surgical Vacuum Systems. Category 

3 systems shall comply with Section 1307.3 through Section 

1309.13 and Section 1312.0 through Section 1313.5, except 

as follows: 


=> 
» 


(1) Medical-surgical vacuum systems shall be permitted to 
be simplex. 
|02) The facility staff shall develop an emergency plan to deal 
with the loss of medical-surgical vacuum. 


(3) Emergency electrical service shall conform to the 
requirements of Section 6.6 of NFPA 99 and NFPA 70. 
[NFPA 99:5.3.3.7] 

>) 1326.5 Valves. Category 3 systems shall comply with Sec- 
tion 1314.0. [NFPA 99:5.3.4] 


300 


1326.6 Station Outlets and Inlets. Category 3 systems «« 
shall comply with Section 1315.0. [NFPA 99:5.3.5] 


1326.7 Pressure and Vacuum Indicators. Category 3 << 
systems shall comply with Section 1316.2. [NFPA 99:5.3.8] 


1326.8 Warning Systems. Warning systems associated << 
with Category 3 systems shall provide the master, area, and 
local alarm functions of a Category 1 system as required in 
Section 1317.0, except as follows: 


(1) Warning systems shall be permitted to be a single alarm 
panel (1.е., a combination master/area alarm panel). | 


(2) The alarm panel shall be located in an area of continuous 
surveillance while the facility is in operation. 

(3) Pressure and vacuum switches/sensors shall be mounted 

at the source equipment with a pressure indicator at the 


master alarm panel. 


— 


(4 


— 


Electrical power for warning systems shall be in accor- 
dance with Section 6.6 of NFPA 99 for Category 3 and 
Category 4 spaces. [NFPA 99:5.3.9] 


1326.9 Distribution. Category 3 systems shall comply with «€ 
Section 1318.0 through Section 1323.12. [NFPA 99:5.3.10] 


1326.10 Labeling and Identification. Category 3 systems << 
shall comply with Section 1323.13 through Section 1323.15. 
[NFPA 99:5.3.11] 


Part V - Dental Gas and Vacuum Systems. 


1327.0 Dental Gas and Vacuum Systems. 


1327.1 General. Dental gas and vacuum systems shall com- 
ply with this code and NFPA 99. 


13272 Emergency Shutoff Valves (Oxygen and 
Nitrous Oxide). | 


(1) АП Category 2 medical gas systems shall have an emer- 
gency shutoff valve accessible from all use-point loca- 
tions in an emergency. 


(2) Where a central medical gas supply system supplies two 
treatment facilities, each facility shall be provided with 
an emergency shutoff valve located in that treatment 
facility so as to be accessible from all use-point locations 
in an emergency. 


G 


— 


Emergency shutoff valves shall be labeled to indicate the 
gas controlled by the shutoff valve and shall shut off only 
the gas to the treatment facility that they serve. 


(4 


— 


A remotely activated shutoff valve at a gas supply mani- 
fold shall not be used for emergency shutoff. For clinical 
purposes, such a remote valve actuator shall not fail-close 
in the event of loss of electric power. Where remote actu- 
ators are the type that fail-open, it shall be mandatory that 
cylinder shutoff valves be closed whenever the system is 
not in use. [NFPA 99:15.4.2.6.1 — 15.4.2.6.4.2] 


13273 Warning Systems (Oxygen and Nitrous 
Oxide). Category 2 warning systems shall comply with Sec- 
tion 1325.10 except as follows: 


(1) Warning systems shall be permitted to be a single alarm 
panel. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


(2) The alarm panel shall be located in an area of continuous 
surveillance while the facility is in operation. 

(3) Pressure and vacuum switches/sensors shall be mounted 
at the source equipment with a pressure indicator at the 
master alarm panel. 

(4) Warning systems for medical gas systems shall provide 
the following alarms: 


(a) Oxygen main line pressure low. 
(b) Oxygen main line pressure high. 


(c) Oxygen changeover to secondary bank or about to 
changeover (if automatic). 


(d) Nitrous oxide main line pressure low. 
(e) Nitrous oxide main line pressure high. 


(f) Nitrous oxide changeover to secondary bank or 
about to changeover (if automatic). 

(5) Audible and noncancelable alarm visual signals shall 
indicate if the pressure in the main line increases or 
decreases 20 percent from the normal operating pressure. 

(6) Visual indications shall remain until the situation that 
caused the alarm is resolved. 

(7) Pressure switches/sensors shall be installed downstream 
of any emergency shutoff valves and any other shutoff 
valves in the system and shall cause an alarm for the 
medical gas if the pressure decreases or increases 20 per- 
cent from the normal operating pressure. 

(8) A cancelable audible indication of each alarm condition 
that produces a sound at the alarm panel shall reinitiate 


the audible signal if another alarm condition occurs while 
the audible signal is silenced. [NFPA 99:15.4.2.10] 


1327.4 Initial Pressure Test. Each section of the piping in 
positive-pressure gas systems and copper vacuum systems 
shall be pressure tested. Plastic vacuum and plastic scaveng- 
ing piping shall not be pressure tested. [NFPA 
99:15.4.7.4.4.1] 


1327.4.1 Pressure Test. Initial pressure tests shall be 
conducted as follows: 


(1) After blowdown of the distribution piping 


(2) After installation of station outlet/inlet rough-in 
assemblies 


(3) Prior to the installation of components of the distri- 
bution piping system that would be damaged by the 
test pressure (e.g., pressure/vacuum alarm devices, 
pressure/vacuum indicators, and line pressure relief 
valves) [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.4.2] 

1327.4.2 Source Shutoff Valve. The source shutoff 

valve shall remain closed during the pressure tests. 

[NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.4.3] 

1327.4.3 Test Pressure. The test pressure for oxygen 

and nitrous oxide piping shall be 1.5 times the system 

operating pressure but not less than a gauge pressure of 

150 psi (1035 kPa). [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.4.4] 

1327.4.4 Examine for Leaks. The test pressure shall 

be maintained until each joint has been examined for 

leakage by means of a leak detectant that is safe for use 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


with oxygen and does not contain ammonia. [NFPA 
99:15.4.7.4.4.5] 
1327.4.5 Leaks Located. Any leaks shall be located, 
repaired (if permitted), or replaced (if required) by the 
installer, and retested. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.4.6] 

1327.5 Maximum Copper Tube Support Spacing. The 


maximum support spacing for copper tube shall be in accor- 
dance with Table 1327.5. [NFPA 99:15.4.5.6.5] 


TABLE 1327.5 
MAXIMUM COPPER TUBE SUPPORT SPACING 
[NFPA 99: TABLE 15.4.5.6.5] 


HANGER 
PIPE SIZE SPACING 
(feet) 
DN8 (NPS 1/4) C of an inch O.D.) 5 
DN10 (NPS */) (‘4 of an inch O.D.) 6 
DNI5 (NPS 5) | (C^ofan inch O.D.) 6 
DN20 (NPS 2%) | (‘4 of an inch O.D.) 7 
DN25 (NPS 1) | (1'4 of an inch O.D.) 8 
DN32 (NPS 11⁄4) | (1% of an inch О.Р.) 9 
a and арат) | edt an inch O.D.) 10 
Vertical risers, all sizes, every floor, but not to 15 
exceed 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


1327.6 Maximum Plastic Pipe Support Spacing. The 
maximum support spacing for plastic pipe shall be in accor- 
dance with Table 1327.6. [NFPA 99:15.4.5.6.6] 


TABLE 13276 
MAXIMUM PLASTIC PIPE SUPPORT SPACING 
[NFPA 99: TABLE 15.4.5.6.6] 


HANGER 
PIPE SIZE SPACING 
(feet) 
DNI5 (NPS %) (% of an inch O.D.) 4 
DN20 (NPS %) (% of an inch O.D.) 4 
DN25 (NPS 1) (1% of an inch O.D.) 4.33 
DN32 (NPS 1%) | (1% of an inch O.D.) 4.33 
DN40 (NPS 1%) | (1% of an inch О.Р.) 4.66 
DN50 (NPS 2) (2% of an inch O.D.) 4.66 
Ee and | «ps 2%) | (2% ofan inch O.D) 5 
Vertical risers, all sizes, every floor, but not to 10 
exceed 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


13277 Standing Pressure Tests for Oxygen and 
Nitrous Oxide Piping. After successful completion of the 
initial pressure tests in Section 1327.4, the gas distribution 
piping shall be subject to a standing pressure test. [NFPA 
99:15.4.7.4.6.1] 


1327.7.1 Tests Required. Tests shall be conducted 
after the final installation of station outlet valve bodies, 


301 


HEALTH CARE FACILITIES AND MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL VACUUM SYSTEMS 


faceplates, and other distribution system components 
(e.g., pressure alarm devices, pressure indicators, line 
pressure relief valves, manufactured assemblies, and 
hoses). [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.2] 


1327.72 Source Valve. The source valve shall be 
closed during this test. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.3] 


1327.7.3 Piping Systems. The piping systems shall be 
subjected to 24-hour standing pressure tests using oil- 
free, dry nitrogen NF. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.4] 


1327.7.4 Test Pressure. Test pressures shall be 20 per- 
cent above the normal system operating line pressure. 
[NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.5] 


1327.7. Change in Test Pressure. At the conclusion 
of the tests, there shall be no change in the test pressure 
except that attributed to specific changes in ambient tem- 
perature. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.6] 


1327.7.6 Leaks. Any leaks shall be located, repaired (if 
permitted), or replaced (if required) by the installer, and 
retested. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.4.6.7] 


13278 Verifier Operational Pressure Test. Operational 
pressure tests shall be performed at each station outlet or ter- 
minal where the user makes connections and disconnections. 
[NFPA 99:15.4.7.5.8.1] 
1327.8.1 Test Gas. Tests shall be performed with the 
gas of system designation. [NFPA 99:15.4.7.5.8.2] 
1327.8.2 Medical Gas Outlets. All medical gas outlets 
with a gauge pressure of 50 psi (345 kPa), including oxy- 
gen and nitrous oxide, shall deliver 1.8 standard cubic feet 
per minute (SCFM) (50 SLPM) with a pressure drop of 
not more than 5 psi (34 kPa) and static pressure of 50 psi 
(345 kPa) to 55 psi (379 kPa). [NFPA 99:15.4.7.5.8.3] 


302 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 14 - FIRESTOP PROTECTION 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 1В 2 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X XX XX XI XI XX XIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 303 


304 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 14 
FIRESTOP PROTECTION 


1401.0 General. 


1401.1 Applicability. Piping penetrations of required fire- 
resistance-rated walls, partitions, floors, floor/ceiling assem- 
blies, roof/ceiling assemblies, or shaft enclosures shall be 
protected in accordance with the requirements of the building 
code, and this chapter. 


1402.0 Construction Documents. 


1402.1 Penetrations. Construction documents shall indi- 
cate with sufficient detail how penetrations of fire-resistance- 
rated assemblies shall be firestopped prior to obtaining design 
approval. 


1403.0 Installation. 


1403.1 Materials. Firestop systems shall be installed in 
accordance with this chapter, the building code, and the man- 
ufacturer's installation instructions. 


1404.0 Combustible Piping Installations. 


1404.1 General Requirements. Combustible piping 
installations shall be protected in accordance with the appro- 
priate fire resistance rating requirements in the building code 
that list the acceptable area, height, and type of construction 
for use in specific occupancies to assure compliance and 
integrity of the fire resistance rating prescribed. 


1404.2 Fire-Resistance Rating. Where penetrating a fire- 
resistance-rated wall, partition, floor, floor-ceiling assembly, 
roof-ceiling assembly, or shaft enclosure, the fire-resistance 
rating of the assembly shall be restored to its original rating. 


1404.3 Firestop Systems. Penetrations shall be protected 
by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested 
in accordance with ASTM E119, ASTM E814, UL 263, or UL 
1479 with a positive pressure differential of not less than 0.01 
of an inch of water (0.002 kPa). Systems shall have an F rat- 
ing of not less than 1 hour but not less than the required fire- 
resistance rating of the assembly being penetrated. Systems 
protecting floor penetrations shall have a T rating of not less 
than 1 hour but not less than the required fire-resistance rating 
of the floor being penetrated. Floor penetrations contained 
within the cavity of a wall at the location of the floor penetra- 
tion do not require a T rating. No T rating shall be required 
for floor penetrations by piping that 1s not in direct contact 
with combustible material. 

1404.4 Connections. Where piping penetrates a rated 
assembly, the combustible piping shall not connect to non- 
combustible piping unless it is capable of being demonstrated 
that the transition is in accordance with Section 1404.3. 
1404.5 Insulation and Coverings. Insulation and cover- 
ings on or in the penetrating item shall not be permitted unless 
the specific insulating or covering material has been tested as 
part of the penetrating firestop system. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1404.6 Sleeves. Where sleeves are used, the sleeves shall 
be securely fastened to the fire-resistance-rated assembly. The 
(inside) annular space between the sleeve and the penetrating 
item and the (outside) annular space between the sleeve and 
the fire-resistance-rated assembly shall be firestopped in 
accordance with this chapter. 


1405.0 Noncombustible Piping Installations. 


1405.1 General Requirements. Noncombustible piping 
installations shall be protected in accordance with the appro- 
priate fire resistance rating requirements in the building code 
that list the acceptable area, height, and type of construction 
for use in specific occupancies to ensure compliance and 
integrity of the fire-resistance rating prescribed. 


1405.2 Fire-Resistance Rating. Where penetrating a fire- 
resistance-rated wall, partition, floor, floor-ceiling assembly, 
roof-ceiling assembly, or shaft enclosure, the fire-resistance 
rating of the assembly shall be restored to its original rating. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Concrete, mortar, or grout shall be permitted to be used 
to fill the annular spaces around cast-iron, copper, cop- 
per alloy, or steel piping that penetrates concrete or 
masonry fire-resistant-rated assemblies. The nominal 
diameter of the penetrating item shall not exceed 6 inches 
(150 mm), and the opening size shall not exceed 144 
square inches (0.093 m°). 


The thickness of concrete, mortar, or grout shall be 
the full thickness of the assembly or the thickness nec- 
essary to provide a fire-resistance rating not less than the 
required fire-resistance rating of the assembly penetrated. 


(2) The material used to fill the annular space shall prevent 
the passage of flame and hot gases capable of igniting 
cotton waste for the time period equivalent to the fire- 
resistance rating of the assembly, where tested to stan- 
dard(s) referenced in Section 1405.3. 


1405.3 Firestop Systems. Penetrations shall be protected 
by an approved penetration firestop system installed as tested 
in accordance with ASTM E119, ASTM E814, UL 263, or 
UL 1479 with a positive pressure differential of not less than 
0.01 of an inch of water (0.002 kPa). Systems shall have an 
F rating of not less than 1 hour but not less than the required 
fire-resistance rating of the assembly being penetrated. Sys- 
tems protecting floor penetrations shall have a T rating of not 
less than 1 hour but not less than the required fire-resistance 
rating of the floor being penetrated. Floor penetrations con- 
tained within the cavity of a wall at the location of the floor 
penetration do not require a T rating. No T rating shall be 
required for floor penetrations by piping that is not in direct 
contact with combustible material. 


1405.4 Connections. Where piping penetrates a rated 
assembly, the combustible piping shall not connect to non- 
combustible piping unless it is capable of being demonstrated 


305 


FIRESTOP PROTECTION 


that the transition is in accordance with the requirements of 
Section 1405.3. 


1405.5 Unshielded Couplings. Unshielded couplings 
shall not be used to connect noncombustible piping unless it 
is capable of being demonstrated that the fire-resistive 
integrity of the penetration 1s maintained. 


1405.6 Sleeves. Where sleeves are used, the sleeves shall 
be securely fastened to the fire-resistance-rated assembly. The 
(inside) annular space between the sleeve and the penetrating 
item and the (outside) annular space between the sleeve and 
the fire-resistance-rated assembly shall be firestopped in 
accordance with this chapter. 


1405.7 Insulation and Coverings. Insulation and cover- 
ings on or in the penetrating item shall not be permitted unless 
the specific insulating or covering material has been tested as 
part of the penetrating firestop system. 


1406.0 Required Inspection. 


1406.1 General. Prior to being concealed, piping penetra- 
tions shall be inspected by the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
to verify compliance with the fire-resistance rating prescribed 
in the building code. 


1406.2 Examination. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall conduct a thorough examination of sufficient represen- 
tative installations, including destructive inspection, to pro- 
vide verification of satisfactory compliance with this chapter, 
the appropriate manufacturer's installation instructions 
applied by the installer, construction documents, specifica- 
tions, and applicable manufacturer's product information. 
1406.3 Penetrations. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall determine the type, size, and quantity of penetrations to 
be inspected. 
1406.4 Field Installations. The Authority Having Juris- 
diction shall compare the field installations with the docu- 
mentation supplied by the installer to determine the following: 
(1) The required F ratings (1 hour, 2 hour, 3 hour, or 4 hour) 
and T ratings (0 hour, 1 hour, 2 hour, 3 hour, or 4 hour) 
of the penetration firestop systems are at least the same 
as the hourly rating of the assembly being penetrated. 
(2) The penetrating firestop system includes the penetrating 
item as documented through testing of the systems con- 
ducted by an independent testing agency. 


(3) The penetrating firestop system is installed as tested. 


306 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 


CHAPTER 15 - ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 

Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC SS | SS/CC 172 13 14 

Adopt Entire Chapter X Хх Ххх 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX 
sections listed below) 
Ея х х 
Chapter/Section 
1501.0 X 
1501.1 X X X 
1501.1.1 X X X 
1501.2 X X X 
1501.2 Exceptions X 
1501.3 X 
1501.3 & Exception X X 
1501.4 X 
1501.5 X X X 
1501.5 Exception X 
Table 1501.5 X t 
1501.5.1 X 
1501.6 X X X 
1501.7 X X X 
1501.8 X 
1501.9 X XX|X X 
1501.9.7 X XX|X 
1501.9.2 X XX 
1501.10 X 
1502.0 X 
1502.1 X X 
1502.1 Exception X 
1502.3 X X 
1502.3.2 X X 
1502.3.3 X X 
1502.4 Exception X 
1502.5 - 1502.6 X 
1503.0 X 
1503.1 X X 
1503.1.1 X 
1503.1.1 - 1503.1.3 X X 
1503.2 - 1503.2.3 X X 
1503.2.2 Exception X 
1503.3 & Exceptions X X X 
1503.4 Exception X X 
Table 1503.4 X X 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


307 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 15 - ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS (continued) 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 | 1-AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3З 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X XX XX I XI XX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XIX 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


»X 
>< 
>< 


Chapter/Section 


1503.5 Exception 


1503.6 


1503.7 Exceptions 2 & 3 
1503.8 Exception 
1503.8.1 

1503.8.2 

1503.8.2.1 - 1503.8.2.3 
1503.8.3 

1503.9 

1503.9.1 

1503.9.3 - 1503.9.4 
Table 1504.2 

1504.3 Exceptions 1 & 2 
1504.4 Note 

1504.5 - 1504.5.3 

Table 1504.5.3 

1504.8 

1504.9 

1504.9.1 

1504.11 

1505.0 - 1505.16 1 
Figure 1505.10 X 
Table 1505.16 

1506.0 - 1506.4 Exceptions 
1506.4 & Exceptions X 
1506.5 X X 
1506.6 - 1506.10.6 X X 
1506.12 X X 
1506.13 X X 


XX x ж 


XX XX ж 


— X 2 2 XX v LXX» Xx X X xXx 
+“ X ра X 2 | | ox X Xx wx 


| — 
=“ — 


X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


308 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 15 
ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


1501.0 General. 


1501.1 Applicability. [BSC-CG, DWR & HCD 1] The pro- 
visions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, alter- 
ation, discharge, use and repair of alternate water source 
systems for nonpotable applications. 


1501.1.1 Allowable Use of Alternate Water. Where 
approved or required by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion, alternate water sources [reclaimed (recycled) water, 
gray water, and on-site treated nonpotable gray water] 
shall be permitted to be used instead of potable water for 
the applications identified in this chapter. 


|| 1501.2 System Design. [BSC-CG, HCD 1 & DWR] 
Alternate water source systems shall be designed in accor- 
dance with this chapter by a registered design professional or 
licensed person who demonstrates competency to design the 
alternate water source system as required by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. Components, piping, and fittings used 
in any alternate water source system shall be listed. 


[BSC-CG & HCD 1] Irrigation design plans shall meet the 
requirements of the California Code of Regulations, Title 23, 
Division 2, Chapter 2.7, Model Water Efficient Landscape 
Ordinance. 


Exceptions: 


(1) A registered design professional or a licensed person 
who demonstrates competency to design the alternate 
water source system is not required to design gray water 
systems having a maximum discharge capacity of 250 
gallons per day (gal/d) (0.011 L/s) for single family and 
multi-family dwellings. 


(2) A registered design professional or a licensed person 
who demonstrates competency to design the alternate 
water source system is not required to design an on-site 
treated nonpotable water system for single-family 
dwellings having a maximum discharge capacity of 250 
gal/d (0.011 L/s). 


1501.3 Permit. [BSC-CG, HCD 1 & DWR] It shall be 
unlawful for a person to construct, install, alter, or cause to be 
constructed, installed, or altered an alternate water source sys- 
tem in a building or on its premises without first obtaining a 
permit to do such work from the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion. No changes or connections shall be made to either the 
alternate water source system or the potable water system 
within a site containing an alternate water source system 
without approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Exception: [BSC-CG & HCD 1] A construction permit shall 
not be required for a clothes washer system meeting the 
requirements of Section 1503.1.1. 

1501.4 Component Identification. System components 
shall be properly identified as to the manufacturer. 

1501.5 Maintenance and Inspection. [BSC-CG, HCD 
1 & DWR] Alternate water source systems and components 
shall be inspected and maintained in accordance with the 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


manufacturer $ recommendations and/or as required by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. [BSC-CG] Where no manu- 
facturer 5 recommendations exist, additional recommenda- 
tions are listed in Table 1501.5. 


Exception: [DWR] Recycled water supply systems that are 
within or a part of a building shall comply with Section 
1505.16. II 


1501.5.1 Maintenance Responsibility. The required II 
maintenance and inspection of alternate water source 
systems shall be the responsibility of the property owner 
unless otherwise required by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


1501.6 Operation and Maintenance Manual. [BSC- 
CG, HCD 1 & DWR] An operation and maintenance manual 
for gray water, on-site treated nonpotable water, [DWR] and || 
recycled water supply systems required to have a permit in 
accordance with Section 1501.3, Section 1505.2, and Section 
1506.2 shall be supplied to the building owner by the system 
designer or installer. The operation and maintenance manual 
shall include the following: 


(1) Diagram(s) of the entire system and the location of sys- 
tem components. 


(2) Instructions for operating and maintaining the system. 


(3) Instructions on maintaining the required water quality for 
on-site treated nonpotable water systems. 


(4) Details on startup, shutdown, and deactivating the sys- 
tem for maintenance, repair, or other purposes. 


(5) Applicable testing, inspection, and maintenance fre- 
quencies in accordance with Section 1501.5 [DWR] or 
Section 1505.16 as applicable. ll 


(6) A method of contacting the installer and/or manufac- 
turer(s). 

(7) Directions to the owner or occupant that the manual 
shall remain with the building throughout the life cycle of 
the structure. 


1501.7 Minimum Water Quality Requirements. [BSC- 
CG, HCD 1 & DWR] The minimum water quality for alter- 
nate water source systems shall meet the applicable water 
quality requirements for the intended application as deter- 
mined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In the absence of 
water quality requirements, for on-site treated nonpotable sys- 
tems, the water quality requirements of IAPMO IGC 324 or | 
NSF/ANSI 350 shall apply. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Water 
quality requirements for on-site treated nonpotable graywa- 
ter shall comply with this section and Section 1506.10.2. || 


Exceptions: 


(1) Water treatment is not required for gray water used in a 
disposal field or for subsurface or subsoil irrigation. 


(2) [DWR] Recycled water shall comply with the water 
quality requirements of Section 1505.15. II 


309 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


TABLE 1501.5 [BSC-CG] 
RECOMMENDED MINIMUM ALTERNATE WATER SOURCE TESTING, INSPECTION, AND MAINTENANCE FREQUENCY 


DESCRIPTION 


MINIMUM FREQUENCY 


Inspect and clean filters and screens, and replace 
(where necessary). 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or every 3 months. 


Inspect and verify that disinfection, filters, and 
water quality treatment devices and systems are 
operational and maintaining minimum water qual- 
ity requirements as determined by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


In accordance with manufacturer's instructions, 


and the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Inspect pumps and verify operation. 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect valves and verify operation. 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect pressure tanks and verify operation. 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Clear debris from and inspect storage tanks, lock- 
ing devices, and verify operation. 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect caution labels and marking. 


In accordance with manufacturer 5 instructions, and/or the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect and maintain mulch basins for gray water 
irrigation systems. 


As needed to maintain mulch depth and prevent ponding and runoff. 


Cross-connection inspection and test* 


In accordance with this chapter, and/or the 


Authority Having Jurisdiction, or after installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


* The cross-connection test shall be performed in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, unless site 
conditions do not require it. Alternate testing requirements shall be permitted by the Authority Having Jurisdiction.. 


1501.8 Material Compatibility. Alternate water source sys- 
tems shall be constructed of materials that are compatible 
with the type of pipe and fitting materials, water treatment, 
and water conditions in the system. 


1501.9 Signage. [BSC-CG, HCD 1, HCD 2 & HCD 1- 

AC] Signage for on-site treated nonpotable gray water shall 

comply with Sections 1501.9.1 and 1501.9.2. [DWR] Signage 

for reclaimed (recycled) water shall comply with Section 
|| 7505.73. 


1501.9.1 Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, 
and Residential Restroom Signs. A sign shall be 
installed in restrooms in commercial, industrial, and 
institutional occupancies and in residential common use 
areas using on-site treated nonpotable gray water, for 
water closets, urinals, or both. Signs shall comply with 
all applicable requirements of the California Building 
Code. Each sign shall contain % of an inch (12.7 mm) 
letters of a highly visible color on a contrasting back- 
ground. The location of the sign(s) shall be such that the 
sign(s) are visible to users. The location of the sign(s) 
shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
and shall contain the following text: 


“TO CONSERVE WATER, THIS BUILDING USES 
ON-SITE TREATED NONPOTABLE GRAYWATER TO 
FLUSH TOILETS AND URINALS.” 


1501.9.2 Equipment Room Signs. Each room con- 
taining on-site treated nonpotable gray water equipment 
shall have a sign posted in a location that is visible to any- 
one working on or near nonpotable gray water equipment 
with the following wording in 1 inch (25.4 mm) letters: 


310 


“CAUTION: ON-SITE TREATED NONPOTABLE GRAY- 
WATER, DO NOT DRINK. DO NOT CONNECT TO 
DRINKING WATER SYSTEM. NOTICE: CONTACT 
BUILDING MANAGEMENT BEFORE PERFORMING 
ANY WORK ON THIS WATER SYSTEM.” 


1501.10 System Controls. Controls for pumps, valves, and 
other devices that contain mercury that come in contact with 
alternate water source water supply shall not be permitted. 


1502.0 Inspection and Testing. 


1502.1 General. Alternate water source systems shall be 
inspected and tested in accordance with Section 1502.2 
through Section /502.3.3, and/or as required by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. 

Exception: [DWR] Recycled water supply systems that are 
within or a part of a building shall comply with Section 
1505.14. 


1502.2 Supply System Inspection and Test. Alternate 
water source systems shall be inspected and tested in accor- 
dance with this code for testing of potable water piping. 


1502.3 Cross-Connection Inspection and Testing. An 
initial visual inspection and initial cross-connection test shall 
be performed on both the potable and alternate water source 
systems before the initial operation of the alternate water 
source system. During an initial or subsequent cross-con- 
nection test, the potable and alternate water source system 
shall be isolated from each other and independently inspected 
and tested to ensure there is no cross-connection in accor- 
dance with Section 1502.3.1 through Section /502.3.3. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1502.3.1 Visual System Inspection. Before com- 
mencing the cross-connection testing, a dual system 
inspection shall be conducted by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction and other authorities having jurisdiction as 
follows: 


(1) Meter locations of the alternate water source and 
potable water lines shall be checked to verify that 
no modifications were made and that no cross-con- 
nections are visible. 


(2) Pumps and equipment, equipment room signs and 
exposed piping in equipment room shall be checked. 


(3) Valves shall be checked to ensure that the valve lock 
seals are still in place and intact. Valve control door 
signs shall be checked to verify that no signs have 
been removed. 


1502.3.2 Cross-Connection Test. 4 cross-connec- 
tion test shall be performed in the presence of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction or other authorities hav- 
ing jurisdiction to determine whether a cross-connection 
has occurred as follows: 


(1) The potable water system shall be activated and 
pressurized. The alternate water source system shall 
be shut down, depressurized, and drained. 


(2) The potable water system shall remain pressurized 
for a minimum period specified by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction while the alternate water source 
system is empty. The minimum period the alternate 
water source system is to remain depressurized shall 
be determined on a case-by-case basis, taking into 
account the size and complexity of the potable and 
the alternate water source distribution systems, but 
in no case shall that period be less than 1 hour. 


(3) The drain on the alternate water source system shall 
be checked for flow during the test and fixtures, 
potable and alternate water source, shall be tested 
and inspected for flow. Flow from an alternate water 
source system outlet indicates a cross-connection. 
No flow from a potable water outlet shall indicate 
that it is connected to the alternate water source sys- 
tem. 


(4) The potable water system shall then be depressur- 
ized and drained. 


(5) The alternate water source system shall then be acti- 
vated and pressurized. When an alternate water 
source is not available for the initial cross-connec- 
tion test, a temporary connection to a potable water 
supply shall be required. At the conclusion of the ini- 
tial cross-connection test, the temporary connection 
to the potable water supply shall be disconnected. 


(6) The alternate water source system shall remain pres- 
surized for a minimum period specified by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction while the potable 
water system is empty. The minimum period the 
potable water system is to remain depressurized 
shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, but in 
no case shall that period be less than 1 hour. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(7) Fixtures, potable, and alternate water source shall be 
tested and inspected for flow. Flow from a potable 
water system outlet indicates a cross-connection. No 
flow from an alternate water source outlet will indi- 
cate that it is connected to the potable water system. 


(8) The drain on the potable water system shall be 
checked for flow during the test and at the end of the 
test. 


(9) Where there is no flow detected in the fixtures which 
would indicate a cross-connection, the potable water 
system shall be repressurized. 


1502.3.3 Discovery of Cross-Connection. If a 
cross-connection is discovered, the following procedure, 
in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction, 
shall be activated immediately: 


(1) Notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction of the cross 
connection. 


(2) The alternate water source piping to the building and 
its premises shall be shutdown at the meter, and the 
alternate water source riser shall be drained. 


(3) Potable water piping to the building and its prem- 
ises shall be shutdown at the meter. 


(4) The cross-connection shall be uncovered and dis- 
connected. 


(5) The building and its premises shall be retested in 
accordance with Section 1502.3.1 and Section 
1502.32. 


(6) The potable water system shall be chlorinated with 
50 parts-per-million (ppm) chlorine for 24 hours. 


(7) The potable water system shall be flushed after 24 
hours, and a standard bacteriological test shall be 
performed. Where test results are acceptable, the 
potable water system shall be permitted to be 
recharged. 


1502.4 Separation Requirements. Underground alternate 
water source service piping other than gray water shall be sep- 
arated from the building sewer in accordance with this code. 
Pipes carrying treated nonpotable water shall be permitted to be | 
run or laid in the same trench as potable water pipes with a 12 
inch (305 mm) minimum vertical and horizontal separation 
where both pipe materials are approved for use within a build- 
ing. Where horizontal piping materials do not comply with this 
requirement, the minimum separation shall be increased to 60 
inches (1524 mm). The potable water piping shall be installed 
at an elevation above the treated nonpotable water piping. 
Exception: [DWR] Recycled water supply systems that are 
within or a part of a building shall comply with Section 1505.12. || 
1502.5 Abandonment. Alternate water source systems that 
are no longer in use or fail to be maintained in accordance 
with Section 1501.5 shall be abandoned. Abandonment shall 
comply with Section 1502.5.1 and Section 1502.5.2. 


1502.5.1 General. An abandoned system or part 
thereof covered under the scope of this chapter shall be 
disconnected from remaining systems, drained, plugged, 
and capped in an approved manner. 


311 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


1502.5.2 Underground Tank. An underground water 
storage tank that has been abandoned or otherwise dis- 
continued from use in a system covered under the scope 
of this chapter shall be completely drained and filled with 
earth, sand, gravel, concrete, or other approved material 
or removed in a manner satisfactory to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


1502.6 Sizing. Unless otherwise provided for in this chap- 
ter, alternate water source piping shall be sized in accordance 
with Chapter 6 for sizing potable water piping. 


1503.0 Gray Water Systems. [BSC-CG] Gray water sys- 
tems shall be verified in accordance with the California Green 
Building Standards Code (CALGreen), Chapter 5, Division 5.3. 


1503.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply to 
the construction, alteration, and repair of gray water systems. A 
city, county, or city and county or other local government may 
adopt, after a public hearing and enactment of an ordinance or 
resolution, building standards that are more restrictive than the 
gray water building standards adopted in this code. For addi- 
tional information, see Health and Safety Code Section 18941.7. 


(A) All gray water systems shall be designed with a diverter 
valve to allow the user to direct the flow to the building 
sewer and either the irrigation field or disposal field, 
whichever is used. The means of changing the direction 
flow of the gray water shall be clearly labeled and readily 
accessible to the user. 


(B) Water used to wash diapers or similarly soiled or infec- 
tious garments or other prohibited contents shall be 
diverted by the user to the building sewer. 


(C) Gray water shall not be used in spray irrigation, allowed 
to pond or runoff and shall not be discharged directly 
into or reach any storm sewer system or any surface body 
of water. 


(D) Human contact with gray water or the soil irrigated by 
gray water shall be minimized and avoided, except as 
required to maintain the gray water system. The dis- 
charge point of any gray water subsoil irrigation or sub- 
surface irrigation field shall be covered by at least two 
(2) inches (51 mm) of mulch, rock, or soil, or a solid 
shield to minimize the possibility of human contact. 


(E) Gray water may be released above the ground surface 
provided at least two (2) inches (51 mm) of mulch, rock, 
or soil, or a solid shield covers the release point. Other 
methods which provide equivalent separation are also 
acceptable. 

(F) Gray water shall not contain hazardous chemicals 
derived from activities such as cleaning car parts, wash- 
ing greasy or oily rags, or disposing of waste solutions. 
(1) [HCD 1] The prohibition in Subsection (F) includes, 

but is not limited to, home photo labs or other similar 
hobbyist or home occupational activities. 
(2) [BSC-CG] Photo labs or similar activities. 

(G) Exemption from construction permit requirements of this 

code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any 


312 


gray water system to be installed in a manner that vio- 
lates other provisions of this code or any other laws or 
ordinances of the Enforcing Agency. 


(H) An operation and maintenance manual shall be provided to 
the owner. Directions shall indicate that the manual is to 
remain with the building throughout the life of the system 
and upon change of ownership or occupancy. 


(1) Agray water system shall not be connected to any potable 
water system without an air gap, reduced-pressure prin- 
ciple backflow preventer, or other physical device which 
prevents backflow and shall not cause ponding or runoff 
of gray water. 


1503.1.1 Clothes Washer System. [HCD 1] A 
clothes washer system in compliance with all of the fol- 
lowing is exempt from the construction permit specified 
in Section 1.8.4.1 and may be installed or altered with- 
out a construction permit: 


(1) If required, notification has been provided to the 
enforcing agency regarding the proposed location 
and installation of a gray water irrigation or dis- 
posal system. 


(2) The design shall allow the user to direct the flow to 
the irrigation or disposal field or the building sewer. 
The direction control of the gray water shall be clearly 
labeled and readily accessible to the user. 


(3) The installation, change, alteration, or repair of the 
system does not include a potable water connection 
or a pump and does not affect other building, plumb- 
ing, electrical, or mechanical components including 
structural features, egress, fire-life safety, sanitation, 
potable water supply piping, or accessibility. 
Note: The pump in a clothes washer shall not be 
considered part of the gray water system. 


(4) The gray water shall be contained on the site where 
it is generated. 


(5) Gray water shall be directed to and contained within 
an irrigation or disposal field. 
(6) Ponding or runoff is prohibited and shall be consid- 


ered a nuisance. 


(7) Gray water may be released above the ground sur- 
face provided at least two (2) inches (51 mm) of 
mulch, rock, or soil, or a solid shield covers the 
release point. Other methods which provide equiva- 
lent separation are also acceptable. 


(8) Gray water systems shall be designed to minimize 
contact with humans and domestic pets. 


(9) Water used to wash diapers or similarly soiled or 
infectious garments shall not be used and shall be 
diverted to the building sewer. 


(10) Gray water shall not contain hazardous chemicals 
derived from activities such as cleaning car parts, 
washing greasy or oily rags, or disposing of waste 
solutions from home photo labs or similar hobbyist 
or home occupational activities. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(11) Exemption from construction permit requirements of 
this code shall not be deemed to grant authorization 
for any gray water system to be installed in a man- 
ner that violates other provisions of this code or any 
other laws or ordinances of the enforcing agency. 


(12) An operation and maintenance manual shall be pro- 
vided to the owner. Directions shall indicate that the 
manual is to remain with the building throughout the 
life of the system and upon change of ownership or 
occupancy. 


(13) Gray water discharge from a clothes washer system 
through a standpipe shall be properly trapped in 
accordance with Section 1005.0. 


1503.1.2 Simple System. Simple systems exceed a 
clothes washer system and shall comply with the follow- 
ing: 

(1) The discharge capacity of a gray water system shall 
be determined by Section 1503.8. Simple systems 
have a discharge capacity of 250 gallons (947 L) per 
day or less. 


(2) Simple systems shall require a construction permit, 
unless exempted from a construction permit by the 
Enforcing Agency. The Enforcing Agency shall con- 
sult with the water purveyor for any public water sys- 
tem (as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 
116275) providing drinking water to the dwelling or 
non-residential structure before allowing an exemp- 
tion from a construction permit. 


(3) The design of simple systems shall meet generally 
accepted gray water system design criteria. 


1503.1.3 Complex System. Any gray water system 

that is not a clothes washer system or simple system shall 

comply with the following: 

(1) The discharge capacity of a gray water system shall be 
determined by Section 1503.8. Complex systems have 
a discharge capacity over 250 gallons (947 L) per day. 


(2) Complex systems shall require a construction permit, 
unless exempted from a construction permit by the 
Enforcing Agency. The Enforcing Agency shall con- 
sult with the water purveyor for any public water sys- 
tem (as defined in Health and Safety Code, Section 
116275) providing drinking water to the dwelling or 
non-residential structure before allowing an exemp- 
tion from a construction permit. 


1503.2 System Requirements. Gray water shall be per- 
mitted to be diverted away from a sewer or private sewage 
disposal system, and discharge to a subsurface irrigation or 
subsoil irrigation system, or disposal field. The gray water 
shall be permitted to discharge to a mulch basin residential 
occupancies. Gray water shall not be used to irrigate root 
crops or food crops intended for human consumption that 
comes in contact with soil. 
1503.2.1 Surge Capacity. Gray water systems shall 
be designed to have the capacity to accommodate peak 
flow rates and distribute the total amount of estimated 
gray water on a daily basis to a subsurface irrigation 
field, subsoil irrigation field, disposal field, or mulch 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


basin without surfacing, ponding, or runoff. A surge tank 
is required for systems that are unable to accommodate 
peak flow rates and distribute the total amount of gray 
water by gravity drainage. The water discharge for gray 
water systems shall be determined in accordance with 
Section 1503.8.1 or Section 1503.8.2. 


Exception: It is not the intent of this section to require 
that all gray water must be handled by an irrigation field 
or disposal field. It is acceptable for excess gray water to 
be diverted to the building sewer through a diverter valve 
or overflow drain as permitted in this chapter. 


1503.2.2 Diversion. The gray water system shall con- 
nect to the sanitary drainage system downstream of fix- 
ture traps and vent connections through an approved 
diverter valve. The diverter valve shall be installed in a 
readily accessible location and clearly indicate the direc- 
tion of flow. 


Exception: [HCD 1] A clothes washer system in com- 
pliance with Section 1503. 1.1. 


1503.2.3 Backwater Valves. Gray water drains subject 
to backflow shall be provided with a backwater valve at 
the point of connection to the building sewer system, so 
located as to be accessible for inspection and maintenance. 


1503.3 Connections to Potable and Reclaimed (Recy- 
cled) Water Systems. Gray water systems shall have no 
direct connection to a potable water supply, on-site treated non- 
potable gray water supply, or reclaimed (recycled) water sup- 
ply systems. 
Exceptions: 


(1) Potable water, on-site treated nonpotable gray water, 
reclaimed (recycled) water, or rainwater is permitted to 
be used as makeup water for a non-pressurized storage tank 
provided the connection is protected by an air gap in accor- 
dance with this code. 


(2) A potable water supply may be connected temporarily 
for the initial cross-connection test of the untreated gray- 
water system as required in Section 1502.3.2. 


1503.4 Location. No gray water system or part thereof shall 
be located on a lot other than the lot that is the site of the 
building or structure that discharges the gray water, nor shall 
a gray water system or part thereof be located at a point hav- 
ing less than the minimum distances indicated in Table 
1503.4. 


Exception: When there exists a lawfully recorded perpetual and 
exclusive covenant to an easement appurtenant and right-of- 
way between adjoining land-owners of two or more contiguous 
lots to discharge gray water from one lot to an adjoining lot. 


1503.5 Plot Plan Submission. No permit for a gray water 
system shall be issued until a plot plan with data satisfactory 
to the Authority Having Jurisdiction has been submitted and 
approved. 


Exception: [HCD 1] A construction permit shall not be 
required for a clothes washer system in compliance with Sec- 
tion 1503.1.1. 

1503.6 Prohibited Location. Where there is insufficient 
lot area or inappropriate soil conditions for adequate absorp- 
tion, no gray water system shall be permitted. II 


313 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


TABLE 1503.4 
LOCATION OF GRAY WATER SYSTEM’ 
SUBSURFACE AND 
aie საგა ოა DEEST ОЕ 
(feet) 
Building structures! 52,9 25.8 5 
Property line adjoining private property 5 55 5 
Water supply wells* 50 100 100 
Streams and lakes* 50 1005 10 100° 
Sewage pits or cesspools 5 5 
Sewage disposal field!? 46 46 
Septic tank > 5 
On-site domestic water service line 5 0 0 
Pressurized public water main 10 107 107 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm 
Notes: 


Building structures do not include porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered, breezeways, roofed carports, roofed porte cocheres, roofed patios, car- 


ports, covered walks, covered driveways, and similar structures or appurtenances. 


„юм 


The distance shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 feet for aboveground tanks where first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Underground tanks shall not be located within a 45 degree angle from the bottom of the foundation, or they shall be designed to address the surcharge 


imposed by the structure. The distance may be reduced to six (6) inches (153 mm) for aboveground tanks when first approved by the Enforcing Agency. 


© сос თითი => 


Where special hazards are involved, the distance required shall be increased as directed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

These minimum clear horizontal distances shall apply between the irrigation or disposal field and the ocean mean higher high tide line. 
Add 2 feet (610 mm) for each additional foot of depth more than 1 foot (305 mm) below the bottom of the drain line. 

For parallel construction or crossings, approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be required. 

The distance shall be permitted to be reduced to 11⁄2 feet (457 mm) for drip and mulch basin irrigation systems. 

The distance shall be permitted to be reduced to 0 feet for surge tanks of 75 gallons (284 L) or less. 


10 The minimum horizontal distance may be reduced to 50 feet (15 240 mm) for irrigation or disposal fields utilizing gray water which has been filtered prior 


to entering the distribution piping. 


1503.7 Drawings and Specifications. The Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction may require the following information to be 
included with or in the plot plan before a permit is issued for a 
gray water system, or at a time during the construction thereof: 


(1) Plot plan drawn to scale and completely dimensioned, 
showing lot lines and structures, direction and approxi- 
mate slope of surface, location of present or proposed 
retaining walls, drainage channels, water supply lines, 
wells, paved areas and structures on the plot, number of 
bedrooms and plumbing fixtures in each structure, loca- 
tion of private sewage disposal system and expansion 
area or building sewer connecting to the public sewer, 
and location of the proposed gray water system. 


Details of construction necessary to ensure compliance 
with the requirements of this chapter, together with a full 
description of the complete installation, including instal- 
lation methods, construction, and materials. 


Details for holding tanks shall include dimensions, struc- 
tural calculations, bracings, and such other pertinent data 
as required. 

A log of soil formations and groundwater level as deter- 
mined by test holes dug in proximity to proposed irriga- 
tion and/or disposal area, together with a statement of 
water absorption characteristics of the soil at the pro- 
posed site as determined by approved percolation tests. 
Exceptions: 


(1) The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall permit the 
use of Table 1504.2 instead of percolation tests. 


314 


(2) The Enforcing Agency may waive the requirement 
for identification of groundwater level and/or soil 
absorption qualities based on knowledge of local 
conditions. 


(3) The absence of groundwater in a test hole three (3) 
vertical feet (915 mm) below the deepest irrigation 
or disposal point shall be sufficient to satisfy this 
section unless seasonal high groundwater levels 
have been documented to rise to within this area. 


(5) Distance between the plot and surface waters such as 
lakes, ponds, rivers or streams, and the slope of the plot 
and the surface water, wherein close proximity. 


1503.8 Procedure for Estimating Gray Water Dis- 
charge. Gray water systems shall be designed to distribute 
the total amount of estimated gray water on a daily basis. The 
water discharge for gray water systems shall be determined in 
accordance with Section 1503.8.1 or Section 1503.8.2. 


Exception: It is not the intent of this section to require that all 
gray water must be handled by an irrigation field or disposal 
field. It is acceptable for excess gray water to be diverted to 
the building sewer through a diverter valve or overflow drain 
as permitted in this chapter. 
1503.8.1 Residential Occupancies. The gray water 
discharge for residential occupancies single family and 
multi-family dwellings shall be calculated by water use 
records, calculations of local daily per person interior 
water use, or the following procedure: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(1) The number of occupants of each dwelling unit shall 
be calculated as follows: 

First bedroom 2 occupants 

Each additional bedroom |1 occupant 


(2) The estimated gray water flows of each occupant 
shall be calculated as follows: 


Showers, bathtubs, and |25 gallons (95 L) per 

lavatories day/occupant 

Laundry 15 gallons (57 L) per 
day/occupant 


(3) The total number of occupants shall be multiplied 
by the applicable estimated gray water discharge as 
provided above and the type of fixtures connected 
to the gray water system. 

1503.8.2 Commercial, Industrial, and Institu- 

tional Occupancies. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 

tion may utilize the gray water discharge procedures 
listed below, water use records or other documentation 
to estimate gray water discharge. 
1503.8.2.1 Lavatories. Daily discharge from lava- 
tories may be determined by the following equation: 


(Equation 15.1) 
Occupants X lavatory flow rate X 3 


Where: 


The number of occupants — square footage of the 
building divided by the occupant load factor from 
the California Plumbing Code Chapter 4, Table 4-1. 


Lavatory fixture flow rate, new construction — That 
from the California Green Building Standards (CAL- 
Green) Code Section 5.303.3.4 


Lavatory fixture flow rate, existing fixtures — Actual 
flow rate for existing fixtures 


3 — Average number of uses per person per day 


1503.8.2.2 Showers. Daily gray water discharge 
from showers may be determined by the following 
equation: 


(Equation 15.2) 
Number of daily uses X shower flow rate X 5 minutes 


1503.8.2.3 Commercial Clothes Washers. Daily 
gray water discharge from commercial clothes wash- 
ers may be determined by the following equation: 


(Equation 15.3) 
Cubic feet of capacity X Water Factor X 6 


Where: 
Water Factor — Gallons per cubic foot 


6 — Average number of uses per day 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


Note: Cubic feet of capacity and Water Factor are 
contained in product specifications or are available 
from the washer manufacturer. 


1503.8.3 Daily Discharge. Gray water systems using 
tanks shall be designed to minimize the amount of time 
gray water is held in the tank and shall be sized to dis- 
tribute the total amount of estimated gray water on a 
daily basis. 

Exception: Approved on-site treated nonpotable gray 
water systems. 


1503.9 Gray Water System Components. Gray water 
system components shall comply with Section 1503.9.1 
through Section /503.9.4. 


[HCD 1] Gray water system components shall comply with 
this chapter. 


1503.9.1 Surge Tanks. Where installed, surge tanks 
shall be in accordance with the following: 


(1) Surge tanks shall be constructed of solid, durable 
materials not subject to excessive corrosion or decay 
and shall be watertight. Aboveground surge tanks 
shall be protected from direct sunlight or shall be 
constructed of UV resistant materials including but 
not limited to heavily tinted or opaque plastic, fiber- 
glass, lined metal, concrete and wood. Surge tanks 
constructed of steel shall be approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction, provided such tanks are in 
accordance with approved applicable standards. 


(2) Each surge tank shall be vented in accordance with 
this code. The vent size shall be determined based on 
the total gray water fixture units as outlined in this 
code. 


(3) Each surge tank shall have an access opening with 
lockable gasketed covers or approved equivalent to 
allow for inspection and cleaning. 


(4) Each surge tank shall have its rated capacity perma- 
nently marked on the unit. Also, a sign stating 
“GRAY WATER SYSTEM, CAUTION DANGER 
— UNSAFE WATER" shall be permanently 
marked on the holding tank. 


(5) Each surge tank shall have an overflow drain. The 
overflow drains shall have permanent connections 
to the building drain or building sewer, upstream of 
septic tanks. The overflow drain shall not be 
equipped with a shutoff valve. 


(6) The overflow drainpipes shall not be less in size than 
the inlet pipe. Unions or equally effective fittings 
shall be provided for piping connected to the surge 
tank. 

(7) Surge tank shall be structurally designed to with- 
stand anticipated earth or other loads. Surge tank 
covers shall be capable of supporting an earth load 
of not less than 300 pounds per square foot (16/2) 
(1465 kg/m?) where the tank is designed for under- 
ground installation. 


315 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(8) Where a surge tank is installed underground, the sys- 
tem shall be designed so that the tank overflow will 
gravity drain to the existing sewer line or septic tank. 
The tank shall be protected against sewer line back- 
flow by a backwater valve installed in accordance 
with this code. 


Surge tanks shall be installed on dry, level, well- 
compacted soil where underground or on a level 3 
inch (76 mm) thick concrete slab or other approved 
method where aboveground. 


(9) 


(10) Surge tanks shall be anchored to prevent against 
overturning where installed aboveground. Under- 
ground tanks shall be ballasted, anchored, or other- 
wise secured, to prevent the tank from floating out of 
the ground where empty. The combined weight of 
the tank and hold down system shall meet or exceed 
the buoyancy forces of the tank. 


(11) [HCD 1] An overflow drain and backwater valve is 
not required on a clothes washer system. 


1503.9.2 Gray Water Pipe and Fitting Materials. 
Aboveground and underground building drainage and 
vent pipe and fittings for gray water systems shall com- 
ply with the requirements for aboveground and under- 
ground sanitary building drainage and vent pipe and 
fittings in this code. These materials shall extend not less 
than 2 feet (610 mm) outside the building. 


1503.9.3 Animals and Insects. Gray water tank 
openings shall be protected to prevent the entrance of 
insects, birds, or rodents into the tank and piping sys- 
tems. Screens installed on vent pipes, inlets, and over- 
flow pipes shall have an aperture of not greater than 1/16 
of an inch (1.6 mm) and shall be close fitting. 


1503.9.4 Freeze Protection. Tanks and piping 
installed in locations subject to freezing shall be provided 
with an approved means of freeze protection. 


1504.0 Subsurface Irrigation System Zones. 


1504.1 General. Irrigation or disposal fields shall be per- 
mitted to have one or more valved zones. Each zone shall be 
of a size to receive the gray water anticipated in that zone. 


1504.2 Required Area of Subsurface Irrigation 
Fields, Subsoil Irrigation Fields, and Mulch Basins. 
The minimum effective irrigation area of subsurface irrigation 
fields, subsoil irrigation fields, and mulch basins shall be 
determined by Table 1504.2 for the type of soil found in the 
excavation, based upon a calculation of estimated gray water 
discharge under Section 1503.8. For a subsoil irrigation field, 
the area shall be equal to the aggregate length of the perfo- 
rated pipe sections within the valved zone multiplied by the 
width of the proposed subsoil irrigation field. 

1504.3 Determination of Maximum Absorption 
Capacity. The irrigation field and mulch basin size shall be 
based on the maximum absorption capacity of the soil and 
determined using Table 1504.2. For soils not listed in Table 


316 


1504.2, the maximum absorption capacity for the proposed 
site shall be determined by percolation tests or another 
method acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. A 
gray water system shall not be permitted, where the percola- 
tion test shows the absorption capacity of the soil is unable to 
accommodate the maximum discharge of the proposed gray 
water irrigation system. 


Exceptions: 


(1) The Enforcing Agency may waive the requirement for 
identification of groundwater level and/or soil absorp- 
tion qualities based on knowledge of local conditions. 


(2) Irrigation fields in compliance with Section 1504.5 which 
only utilize drip type emitters are exempt from percola- 
tion tests. 

TABLE 1504.2 
DESIGN OF SIX TYPICAL SOILS 
ннн SQUARE | wo 
ABSORPTION CAPACITY 
TION/LEACHING 
AREA PER 100 IN GALLONS PER 
TYPE OF SOIL SQUARE FOOT 
GALLONS OF 
OF IRRIGATION/ 
ESTIMATED GRAY 
WATER DISCHARGE LEACHING AREA FOR 
PER DAY A 24-HOUR PERIOD 

Coarse sand or 20 50 

gravel 

Fine sand 25 4.0 

Sandy loam 40 2.5 

Sandy clay 60 1.7 

Clay with consider- 

90 1.1 

able sand or gravel 

Clay with small 

amounts of sand or 120 0.8 

gravel 


For SI units: 1 square foot = 0.0929 та?, 1 gallon per дау = 0.000043 1% 


1504.4 Groundwater Level. No excavation for an irriga- 
tion field, disposal field, or mulch basin shall extend within 
3 feet (914 mm) vertical of the highest known seasonal 
groundwater level, nor to a depth where gray water contam- 
inates the groundwater or surface water. The applicant shall 
supply evidence of groundwater depth to the satisfaction of 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Note: The absence of groundwater in a test hole three (3) 
vertical feet (015 mm) below the deepest irrigation or dis- 
posal point shall be sufficient to satisfy this section unless 
seasonal high groundwater levels have been documented to 
rise to within this area. 


1504.5 Irrigation, Disposal Field and Mulch Basin 
Construction. Irrigation fields, disposal fields and mulch 
basins used in gray water systems shall comply with this sec- 
tion. Gray water systems may contain either an irrigation 
field or a disposal field or a combination of both. This section 
is not intended to prevent the use of other methods of gray 
water irrigation or disposal approved by the Enforcing 
Agency. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


[BSC-CG] Irrigation design shall be verified in accor- 
dance with the California Green Building Standards Code 
(CALGreen), Chapter 5, Division 5.3. 


[HCD 1] Irrigation design shall be verified in accor- 
dance with the California Green Building Standards Code 
(CALGreen), Chapter 4, Division 4.3. 


1504.5.1 Mulch Basin. A mulch basin may be used as 
an irrigation or disposal field. Mulch basins shall be 
sized in accordance with Table 1504.2 and of sufficient 
depth, length and width to prevent ponding or runoff dur- 
ing the gray water surge of a clothes washer, bathtub or 
shower. Mulch must be replenished as required due to 
decomposition of organic matter. Mulch basins will 
require periodic maintenance, reshaping or removal of 
dirt to maintain surge capacity and to accommodate 
plant growth and prevent ponding or runoff. 


1504.5.2 Irrigation Field. The provisions of this sec- 
tion are not intended to prevent the use of any appropri- 
ate material, appliance, installation, device, design or 
method of construction. If an alternate design is not 
available, the following provisions may be used as guid- 
ance in the design of a gray water irrigation field: 


(1) Filters used in gray water irrigation systems shall 
be as specified by the manufacturer s installation 
instructions for the design flow rate and intended 
use. The filter backwash and flush discharge shall 
be contained and disposed of into the building sewer 
system, septic tank or, with approval of the Enforc- 
ing Agency, a separate mini-leachfield sized to 
accept all the backwash and flush discharge water. 
Filter backwash water and flush water shall not be 
used for any purpose. Sanitary procedures shall be 
followed when handling filter backwash and flush 
discharge or gray water. 


(2) Emitters shall be designed to resist root intrusion 
and shall be of a design recommended by the man- 
ufacturer for the intended gray water flow and use. 


(3) Each irrigation zone shall be designed to include no 
less than the number of emitters specified in Table 
1504.5.5, or through a procedure designated by the 
Enforcing Agency. Minimum spacing between emit- 
ters in any direction shall be sufficient to prevent 
surfacing or runoff. 


(4) The system design shall provide user controls, such 
as valves, switches, timers and other controllers, as 
appropriate, to rotate the distribution of gray water 
between irrigation zones. 


(5) All drip irrigation supply lines shall be polyethylene 
tubing or PVC Class 200 pipe or better and Schedule 
40 fittings. All joints shall be pressure tested at 40 psi 
(276 kPa), and shown to be drip tight for five minutes, 
before burial. All supply piping shall be covered to a 
minimum depth of two (2) inches (51 mm) of mulch or 
soil. Drip feeder lines can be poly or flexible PVC tub- 
ing and shall be covered to a minimum depth of two 
(2) inches (51 mm) of mulch or soil. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(6) Where pressure at the discharge side of the pump 
exceeds 20 psi (138 kPa), a pressure-reducing valve 
able to maintain downstream pressure no greater 
than the maximum operating pressure of the 
installed tubing, emitters, or other components shall 
be installed downstream from the pump and before 
any emission device. 


(7) When an irrigation system utilizes a pump, and dis- 
charges water at a point higher than the pump, a 
backwater valve shall be installed downstream of the 
pump to prevent back siphonage of water and soil. 


1504.5.3 Disposal Field. The provisions of this sec- 
tion are not intended to prevent the use of any appropri- 
ate material, appliance, installation, device, design or 
method of construction. If an alternate design is not 
available, the following provisions may be used as guid- 
ance in the design of a gray water disposal field: 


(A) Disposal systems shall be not less than three (3) 
inches (80 mm) in cross sectional dimension and 
shall be constructed of perforated high-density poly- 
ethylene pipe, perforated ABS pipe, perforated PVC 
pipe, leaching chambers or other approved materi- 
als, provided that sufficient openings are available 
for distribution of the gray water into the trench 
area. Material, construction, and perforation shall 
be in compliance with the appropriate absorption 
fields drainage standards and shall be approved by 
the Enforcing Agency. 

(B) Filter material, clean stone, gravel, slag, or similar 
filter material acceptable to the Enforcing Agency, 
varying in size from three-quarter ($4) inch (19.1 
mm) to two and one-half (212) inches (64 mm) shall 
be placed in the trench to the depth and grade 
required by this section. The perforated section shall 
be laid on the filter material in an approved man- 
ner. The perforated section shall then be covered 
with filter material to the minimum depth required 
by this section. The filter material shall then be cov- 
ered with untreated building paper, straw, or similar 
porous material to prevent closure of voids with 
earth backfill. No earth backfill shall be placed over 
the filter material cover until after inspection and 
acceptance. 


Exception: Manufactured leaching chambers shall 
be installed in compliance with the manufacturer S 
installation instructions. 


(C) Disposal fields shall be constructed in accordance 
with Table 1504.5.3. 


(D) When necessary on sloping ground to prevent exces- 
sive line slopes, disposal lines shall be stepped or 
installed on the contour lines of the slope. The lines 
between each horizontal leaching section shall be 
made with approved water-tight joints and installed 
on natural or unfilled ground. 


317 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


TABLE 1504.5.3 
SUBSOIL IRRIGATION FIELD CONSTRUCTION 


DESCRIPTION MINIMUM MAXIMUM 
Number of drain lines per 1 
valved zone’ 
Length of each perforated line’ = 100 feet 
Bottom width of trench’ 12 inches 24 inches 
Spacing of lines, center to center! 4 feet — 
Depth of earth covers of lines 10 inches — 
Depth of filter material cover of . 
à 2 inches = 
lines 
Depth of filter material beneath . 
ADU 3 inches = 
lines 
Grade of perforated lines level level 3 inches рег 
100 feet 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch per foot = 

83.3 mm/m 

1 Manufactured leaching chambers shall be installed in compliance with 
the manufacturer S installation instructions. 


TABLE 1504.5.5 
SUBSURFACE IRRIGATION DESIGN 
CRITERIA FOR SIX TYPICAL SOILS 


MINIMUM NUMBER 
OF EMITTERS PER 
MAXIMUM GALLON OF 
TYPE OF SOIL EMITTER DISCHARGE| ESTIMATED GRAY 
(gallons per day) WATER DISCHARGE 
PER DAY* 
(gallons per day) 
Sand 1.8 0.6 
Sandy loam 1.4 0.7 
Loam 1.2 0.9 
Clay loam 0.9 1.1 
Silty clay 0.6 1.6 
Clay 0.5 2.0 
For SI units: 1 gallon per day = 0.000043 L/s 
* The estimated gray water discharge per day shall be determined in accor- 


dance with Section 1503.8 of this code. 


1504.6 Reserved. 
1504.7 Reserved. 


1504.8 Gray Water System Color and Marking Infor- 
mation. Pressurized gray water distribution systems shall be 
identified as containing nonpotable water in accordance with 
Section 601.3 of this code. Marking shall be at intervals not to 
exceed 5 feet (1524 mm). Gray water distribution piping 
upstream of any connection to an irrigation or disposal field or 
a distribution valve shall be identified with the words “CAU- 
TION: NONPOTABLE GRAY WATER, DO NOT DRINK.” 


1504.9 Other Collection and Distribution Systems. 
Other collection and distribution systems shall be approved 
by the local Authority Having Jurisdiction, as allowed by Sec- 
tion 301.3 of this code. 


318 


1504.9.1 Future Connections. Gray water stub-out || 
plumbing may be allowed for future connection prior to 
the installation of irrigation lines and landscaping. Stub- 
out shall be permanently marked “CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE GRAY WATER, DO NOT DRINK.” 


1504.10 Testing. Building drains and vents for gray water 
systems shall be tested in accordance with this code. Surge 
tanks shall be filled with water to the overflow line prior to 
and during the inspection. Seams and joints shall be left 
exposed, and the tank shall remain watertight. A flow test 
shall be performed through the system to the point of gray 
water discharge. Lines and components shall be watertight 
up to the point of the irrigation perforated and drip lines. 


1504.11 Maintenance. Gray water systems and compo- 
nents shall be maintained in accordance with Section 1501.5. 


1505.0 Recycled Water Supply Systems in Buildings. 


1505.1 General. The provisions of Section 1505.0 through 
Section 1505.16 shall apply to safely plumb buildings with both 
potable and recycled water supply systems. Unless otherwise || 
specified in this code, the general provisions applying to alter- 
nate water systems pursuant to Section 1501.0 through Section 
1501.10 and Section 1502.4 through Section 1502.6 shall apply 
to recycled water supply systems. The provisions in this section 
encompass the installation, construction, alteration, and repair of 
recycled water supply systems that are within or a part of a 
building , including a landscape irrigation system that connects 
to plumbing that is within or a part of a building, and receive 
reclaimed (recycled) water provided by a water/wastewater util- 
ity. When dealing with recycled water supply systems, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction and Enforcing Agency may 
include the recycled water purveyor or potable water purveyor 
in accordance with their respective statutory authority and 
responsibility as provided on their respective permits for sup- 
plying water. Plumbing systems using reclaimed (recycled) 
water that do not enter the interior of a building plumbed with 
potable water are not encompassed by this section. All 
reclaimed (recycled) water use, covered and not covered by this 
code, is subject to applicable provisions of the State Water 
Resources Control Board s Cross-Connection Control Policy 
Handbook and the California Code of Regulations: Title 22 and 
Title 23. 


1505.1.1 Allowed Uses. Allowed uses shall include 
water closets, urinals, trap primers for floor drains and 
floor sinks, aboveground and subsurface irrigation, 
industrial or commercial cooling or air conditioning and 
other uses as generally allowed in the California Code of 
Regulations, Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3 and specifi- 
cally allowed in the permit for the facility producing or 
supplying the reclaimed (recycled) water issued by the 
State Water Resources Control Board or Regional Water 
Quality Control Board. 

1505.1.2 Structures Allowed for Toilet and Urinal 
Flushing. In accordance with Water Code Section 13553, 
reclaimed (recycled) water shall be allowed for toilet and 
urinal flushing in certain structures. These structures 
include commercial, retail, and office buildings, theaters, 
auditoriums, condominium projects, schools, hotels, apart- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ments, barracks, dormitories, jails, prisons, reformatories, 
and other structures as determined by the State Water 
Resources Control Board. 


1505.2 Permit. It shall be unlawful for a person to construct, 
install, alter, or cause to be constructed, installed, or altered 
a recycled water supply system within a building or on its 
premises without first obtaining a permit to do such work 
from the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Prior to commencing the issuance of permits for recy- 
cled water supply systems pursuant to state requirements 
relating to recycled water, a city, county, city and county or 
other local agency shall seek consultation with the State 
Water Resources Control Board, local public health depart- 
ment and local recycled water purveyor to ensure that state 
and local public health concerns are addressed in local stan- 
dards or ordinances, or in issuing permits. 


1505.2.1 Plumbing Plan Submission. No permit 
for a recycled water supply system shall be issued until 
complete plumbing plans, with data satisfactory to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, have been submitted and 
approved. 


1505.3 System Changes. No changes or connections shall 
be made to either the recycled water supply system or the 

|| potable water system within a site containing a recycled water 
supply system without approval by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


1505.4 Connections to Potable or Recycled Water 
Supply Systems. Recycled water supply systems shall have 
no direct connection to a potable water supply or alternate 
water source system. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Potable water is permitted to be used as makeup water 
for a reclaimed (recycled) water storage tank provided 
the potable water supply inlet is protected by an air gap 
in accordance with this code. 


(2) A potable water supply may be connected temporarily 

for initial testing of the recycled water supply system as 

II provided in Section 1505.14.2.2. Prior to temporarily 

connecting the potable line to the recycled water supply 

system for the initial cross-connection test purposes, the 

potable line must have a reduced-pressure principle 
backflow preventer installed. 


(3) Reclaimed (recycled) water is permitted to be used as 
makeup water for an alternate water source system pro- 
vided the recycled water supply system is protected by 
an air gap in accordance with this code. 


(4) In order to use potable water as an auxiliary water sup- 
ply when there is an interruption to the reclaimed (recy- 
cled) water supply, a changeover device, swivel ell, or 
other assembly is permitted if the following two condi- 
tions are met: 


(a) The water user maintains ongoing compliance with 
State Water Resources Control Board s Cross-Con- 
nection Control Policy Handbook requirements. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(b) The changeover device, swivel ell, or other assembly 
complies with the State Water Resources Control 
Board's Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook 
requirements. 


1505.5 Water Pressure. Reclaimed (recycled) water sys- 
tems supplying water to water closets, urinals, and trap 
primers shall be capable of delivering not less than 15 
pounds-force per square inch (psi) (103 kPa) residual pres- 
sure at the highest and most remote outlet served. Where the 
water pressure in the reclaimed water supply system within 
the building exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa), a pressure reducing 
valve reducing the pressure to 80 psi (552 kPa) or less to 
water outlets in the building shall be installed. 


1505.6 Initial Cross-Connection Test. A cross-connection << 
test is required in accordance with Section /505.14.2.2. Before || 
the building is occupied or the system is activated, the installer 
shall perform an initial cross-connection test in the presence of 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction or other authorities having 
jurisdiction. The test shall be ruled successful by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction before final approval is granted. 


1505.7 Recycled Water Supply System Materials. << 
Reclaimed (recycled) water supply and distribution system 
materials shall comply with the requirements of this code for 
potable water supply and distribution systems unless other- 
wise provided for in this section. 


1505.8 Recycled Water Supply System Color and «« 
Marking Information. 4// mechanical equipment, including 
control valves, appurtenant to recycled water supply systems 
shall be painted purple or composed of purple material 
matching Pantone color No. 512, 522C or equivalent. Recy- 
cled water supply systems shall be identified and permanently 
marked with clearly visible black uppercase lettering on pur- 
ple background. The identification may be accomplished by 
labeling metallic and non-metallic piping using purple-col- 
ored (Pantone color No. 512) adhesive Mylar PVC tape 
affixed along the entire length of the pipe, or using non-metal- 
lic pipe manufactured with purple (Pantone color No. 512, 
522C, or equivalent) integral to the material. For either mate- 
rial, the tape or pipe shall be installed so the wording is 
clearly visible and shall be field or factory marked as follows: 


"CAUTION: NONPOTABLE RECYCLED WATER, DO NOT 
DRINK. " 


1505.9 Valves. Valves, except fixture supply control valves, << 
shall be equipped with a locking feature. 


1505.9.1 Valve Seals. The master reclaimed (recycled) || 
water shut-off valve and/or the reclaimed (recycled) 
water meter curb cock and each valve within a wall shall 
be sealed after the recycled water supply system has been 
approved and placed into operation. These seals shall be 
either crimped lead wire seal or plastic break away seal 
which, if broken after system approval, shall be deemed 
conclusive evidence that the recycled water supply sys- 
tem has been accessed. The seals shall be purple, num- 
bered, and contain the words “RECYCLED WATER,” 
and shall be supplied by the recycled water purveyor, or 
by other arrangements acceptable to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 


319 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


[| 1505.9.2 Valve and Appurtenance Access Door 
Signs. Each reclaimed (recycled) water valve within a 
wall shall have its access door into the wall equipped 
with a warning sign approximately 6 inches by 6 inches 
(152 mm x 152 mm) with wording in approximately 3/8 
inch (9.5 mm) letters on a purple background. The word- 
ing text and format of the sign shall be substantially the 

II same as that specified in Section 1505.13.3. The signs 
shall be attached inside the access door frame and shall 
hang in the center of the access door frame. This sign 
requirement shall be applicable to any and all access 
doors, hatches, etc., leading to reclaimed (recycled) 
water piping and appurtenances. 


уу 1505.10 Hose Bibbs. Hose bibbs shall not be allowed on 
reclaimed (recycled) water piping systems. Only quick cou- 
plers that differs from those installed on the potable water 
system shall be used on the recycled water piping system in 
areas subject to public access. Quick couplers supplying 
reclaimed (recycled) water shall be marked with the words: 
"CAUTION: NONPOTABLE RECYCLED WATER, DO 
NOT DRINK," and one of the symbols in Figure 1505.10. 


Exception: In accordance with Health and Safety Code Sec- 

tion 8117 and Section 8118, hose bibbs are approved for use 

in cemeteries supplied with reclaimed (recycled) water. A 

hose bibb in an area subject to access by the general public 

shall be equipped with a sign marked "CAUTION: NON- 

POTABLE RECYCLED WATER, DO NOT DRINK, " and one 
|| of the symbols in Figure 1505.10. 


დ 


II FIGURE 1505.10 


УУ 1505.11 Required Appurtenances. The recycled water 
supply system and the potable water system within the build- 
ing and the premises shall be provided with the required 
appurtenances (e.g., valves, air/vacuum relief valves, etc.) to 
allow for testing as required for a cross-connection test in 

|| accordance with Section /505.14.2. 


» 1505.12 Pipe Separation in Trenches. Reclaimed (recy- 
cled) water pipes shall be permitted to be run or laid in the 
same trench as potable water pipes with 12 inches (305 mm) 
minimum vertical and horizontal separation where both pipe 
materials are approved for use within a building. Where pip- 
ing materials do not meet this requirement, the minimum hor- 
izontal separation shall be increased to 48 inches (7220 mm). 
The potable water piping shall be installed at an elevation 
above the reclaimed (recycled) water piping. Reclaimed 
(recycled) water pipes laid in the same trench or crossing 
building sewer or drainage piping shall be installed in accor- 
dance with Section 609.0 and Section 720.0 of this code for 
water pipes. 


320 


1505.13 Signage. Signs in rooms and water closet tanks in << 
buildings using reclaimed (recycled) water shall be in accor- 
dance with Section /505.13.1, Section 1505.13.2, and Section 
1505.13.3. Signs on access doors to valves and appurtenances 
shall be in accordance with Section 1505.9.2. 


1505.13.1 Commercial, Industrial, Institutional, || 
and Residential Restroom Signs. A sign shall be 
installed in each restroom of commercial, industrial, and 
institutional occupancies, and in residential common use 
areas using reclaimed (recycled) water for water clos- 
ets, urinals, or both. Each sign shall contain letters of a 
highly visible color on a contrasting background with a 
character height as specified in the California Building 
Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2), 
Section 1143A.5 and Section 11B-703.5. The location of 
the sign(s) shall be such that the sign(s) are visible to 
users and shall be approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. The sign(s) shall contain the following text: 
"TO CONSERVE WATER, THIS BUILDING USES RECY- 
CLED WATER TO FLUSH TOILETS AND URINALS.” 


1505.13.2 Tank-Type Toilet Signs. Where tank-type || 
toilets (water closets) are flushed with recycled water, a 
permanent sign (such as plastic or stainless steel) shall 
be installed inside the tank to warn that the water within 
the tank is not a suitable emergency drinking water sup- 
ply. The sign shall be labeled: “CAUTION: NON- 
POTABLE RECYCLED WATER — DO NOT DRINK.” 


1505.13.3 Equipment Room Signs. Each room con- || 
taining reclaimed (recycled) water equipment shall have 
a sign posted in a location that is visible to anyone work- 
ing on or near reclaimed (recycled) water equipment with 
the following wording in I inch (25.4 mm) letters on a 
purple background: 

“CAUTION: NONPOTABLE RECYCLED WATER, DO 
NOT DRINK. DO NOT CONNECT TO DRINKING 
WATER SYSTEM. NOTICE: CONTACT BUILDING 
MANAGEMENT BEFORE PERFORMING ANY WORK 
ON THIS WATER SYSTEM.” 


1505.14 Inspection and Testing. Recycled water supply << 
systems shall be inspected and tested in accordance with Sec- 
tion 7505.14.1 and Section 1505.14.2. The reclaimed (recy- || 
cled) water purveyor or other designated appointee may 
substitute for the Authority Having Jurisdiction for the pur- 
pose of inspections and tests pursuant to this section. 
1505.14.1 Supply System Inspection and Test. || 
Recycled water supply systems shall be inspected and 
tested in accordance with this code for testing of potable 
water piping. 
1505.14.2 Cross-Connection Inspection and Test- || 
ing. An initial visual inspection and an initial cross-con- 
nection test shall be performed on both the potable and 
recycled water supply systems before the initial opera- 
tion of the recycled water supply system. During an ini- 
tial or subsequent cross-connection test, the potable 
water system and recycled water supply system shall be 
isolated from each other and independently inspected 
and tested to ensure there is no cross-connection in 
accordance with Section 1505.14.2.2. Initial or subse- || 
quent inspections or tests shall be performed in accor- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


dance with Section 1505.14.2.1 through Section 
1505.14.2.4. The inspection and testing shall be per- 
formed by a cross-connection control specialist who has 
valid certification from a certifying organization recog- 
nized by the State Water Resources Control Board pur- 
suant to its Cross-Connection Control Policy Handbook. 


(1) Written reports of cross-connection inspections and 
testing shall be performed as provided in California 
Code of Regulations, Title 22, Section 60316. 


(2) A cross-connection test pursuant to Section 
1505.14.2.2 shall be performed on the premises of a 
recycled water supply system when there is material 
reason to believe that the potable water system or 
recycled water supply system separation from 
another water supply has been compromised. A 
material reason to believe that the system has been 
compromised may be based on, but is not limited to, 
evidence gathered (a) during a visual inspection 
performed pursuant to Section 1505.14.2.1, (b) asa 
result of an inspection performed following com- 
plaints of water quality or flow conditions consis- 
tent with a compromised system, or (c) during a 
visual inspection that indicates that the recycled 
water supply system has been modified. 


1505.14.2.1 Visual System Inspection. A visual 
dual system inspection shall be conducted by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction and other authorities 
having jurisdiction to verify that no modifications 
were made, and that no cross-connections are visi- 


ble as follows: 


(1) Meter locations of the reclaimed (recycled) water 
source and potable water lines shall be checked. 


(2) All pumps and equipment, equipment room 
signs, and exposed piping in equipment room 
shall be checked. 

(3) All valves shall be checked to ensure that the 
valve lock seals are still in place and intact. 
Valve control door signs shall be checked to 
verify that no signs have been removed. 


1505.14.2.2 Cross-Connection Test. А cross- 
connection test shall be performed pursuant to Sec- 
tion 1505.14.2. The test shall be conducted in the 
presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction or 
other authorities having jurisdiction to determine 
whether a cross connection has occurred as follows: 


(1) Thepotable water system shall be activated and 
pressurized. The recycled water supply system 
shall be shut down, depressurized, and drained. 


(2) The potable water system shall remain pressur- 
ized for a minimum period of time specified by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction while the 
recycled water supply system is empty. The min- 
imum period the recycled water supply system 
is to remain depressurized shall be determined 
on a case-by-case basis, taking into account the 
size and complexity of the potable and the recy- 
cled water supply systems, but in no case shall 
that period be less than 1 hour. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(3) All fixtures, potable and reclaimed (recycled) 
water source, shall be tested and inspected for 
flow. Flow from a recycled water supply system 
outlet indicates a cross-connection. No flow from 
a potable water outlet shall indicate that it is 
connected to the recycled water supply system. 


(4) The drain on the recycled water supply system 
shall be checked for flow during the test and at 
the end of the test. 


(5) The potable water system shall then be depres- 
surized and drained. 


(6) The recycled water supply system shall then be 
activated and pressurized. For the initial cross- 
connection test, a temporary connection to a 
potable water supply shall be required to test 
the recycled water supply system plumbing. At 
the conclusion of the initial cross-connection 
test, the temporary connection to the potable 
water supply shall be disconnected. 


(7) The recycled water supply system shall remain 
pressurized for a minimum period of time spec- 
ified by the Authority Having Jurisdiction while 
the potable water system is empty. The mini- 
mum period the potable water system is to 
remain depressurized shall be determined on a 
case-by-case basis, but in no case shall that 
period be less than 1 hour. 


(8) All fixtures, potable and reclaimed (recycled) 
water, shall be tested and inspected for flow. 
Flow from a potable water system outlet indi- 
cates a cross-connection. No flow from a recy- 
cled water supply system outlet will indicate 
that it is connected to the potable water system. 


(9) The drain on the potable water system shall be 
checked for flow during the test and at the end 
of the test. 


(10) Where there is no flow detected in the fixtures 
that would indicate a cross-connection, the 
potable water system shall be repressurized. 


Where shutting off the water is not practical for res- 
idential, institutional, or industrial buildings, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction may authorize testing 
procedures other than those described above. 
1505.14.2.3 Discovery of Cross-Connection. || 
In the event that a cross-connection is discovered, 
the following procedure shall be activated immedi- 
ately: 

(1) Notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction of the 
cross-connection. 

(2) The reclaimed (recycled) water piping to the 
building and its premises shall be shut down at 
the meter, and the reclaimed (recycled) water 
riser shall be drained. 

(3) Potable water piping to the building and its 
premises shall be shut down at the meter. 

(4) The cross-connection shall be uncovered and 
disconnected. 


321 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


(5) The building and its premises shall be retested 
in accordance with Section 1505.14.2.1 and 
Section 1505.14.2.2. 


(6) The potable water system shall be chlorinated 
with 50 parts-per-million (ppm) chlorine for 24 
hours. 


(7) The potable water system shall be flushed afier 
24 hours, and a standard bacteriological test 
shall be performed. Where test results are 
acceptable, the potable water system shall be 
permitted to be recharged. 


1505.14.2.4 Periodic Inspection. Periodic 
visual inspections of recycled water supply systems 
shall be required by the recycled water supplier or 
designee following the procedures in Section 
1505.14.2.1. Pursuant to California Code of Regu- 
lations, Title 22, Section 60316, annual visual 
inspections shall be required for recycled water sup- 
ply systems that are within or a part of a building. 


1505.15 Minimum Water Quality Requirements for 
Reclaimed (Recycled) Water. The minimum water qual- 
ity for reclaimed (recycled) water shall meet the applicable 
water quality requirements of California Code of Regulations, 
Title 22, Division 4, Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 
60301) for disinfected tertiary recycled water and the appli- 
cable reclaimed (recycled) water use. The reclaimed (recy- 
cled) water supplier shall supply water in accordance with 
permits issued by the State Water Resources Control Board or 
Regional Water Quality Control Board. 

1505.16 Maintenance and Inspection. Recycled water 
supply systems and components shall be inspected and main- 
tained in accordance with the manufacturer 5 recommendations 
and/or as required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. The 


frequency of testing, inspection, and maintenance shall be in 


accordance with Table 1505.16. The required inspection and 
maintenance shall be the responsibility of the property owner, 
unless otherwise required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1506.0 On-Site Treated Nonpotable Gray Water Sys- 
tems. 


1506.1 General. The provisions of this section shall apply 
to the installation, construction, alteration, and repair of on- 
site treated nonpotable gray water systems intended to supply 
uses such as water closets, urinals, trap primers for floor 


drains and floor sinks, above and belowground irrigation, and 
other uses approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Other approved nonpotable water sources including swim- 
ming pool backwash operations, air conditioner condensate, 
rainwater, cooling tower blow-down water, foundation 
drainage, steam system condensate, fluid cooler discharge 
water, food steamer discharge water, combination oven dis- 
charge water, industrial process water, and fire pump test water 
may be permitted to be collected for re-use by gray water sys- 
tems, as approved for the intended application. 


1506.2 Plumbing Plan Submission. No permit for an 
on-site treated nonpotable gray water system shall be issued 
until complete plumbing plans, with data satisfactory to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, have been submitted and 
approved. [BSC-CG & HCD 1] Prior to commencing the 
issuance of permits for indoor gray water systems pursuant to 
state requirements relating to graywater, a city, county, city 
and county or other local agency shall seek consultation with 
the local public health department to ensure that local pub- 
lic health concerns are addressed in local standards or ordi- 
nances, or in issuing permits. See California Water Code 
Section 14877.3. 


1506.3 System Changes. No changes or connections shall 
be made to either the on-site treated nonpotable gray water 
system or the potable water system within a site containing an 
on-site treated nonpotable gray water system without 
approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1506.4 Connections to Potable or Recycled Water 
Supply Systems. On-site treated nonpotable gray water 
systems shall have no direct connection to a potable water 
supply or recycled water supply system. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Potable or reclaimed (recycled) water is permitted to be 
used as makeup water for a non-pressurized storage tank 
provided the makeup water supply inlet is protected by 
an air gap in accordance with this code. 


(2) A potable water supply may be connected temporarily for 
the initial cross-connection test of the on-site treated non- 
potable gray water system as provided in Section 1502.3.2. 


1506.5 Water Pressure. On-site treated non-potable gray [Il 
water systems supplying water to water closets, urinals, and 
trap primers shall be capable of delivering not less than 15 
pounds-force per square inch (psi) (103 kPa) residual pres- 
sure at the highest and most remote outlet served. Where the 


TABLE 1505.16 
MINIMUM RECLAIMED (RECYCLED) WATER SOURCE TESTING, INSPECTION, AND MAINTENANCE FREQUENCY 


DESCRIPTION 


MINIMUM FREQUENCY* 


Inspect and clean filters and screens, and replace (where necessary). 


Every 3 months. 


Inspect pumps and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect valves and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect pressure tanks and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Clear debris from and inspect storage tanks, locking devices, and 
verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


Inspect caution labels and marking. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter. 


*Note: Frequency is as described in this table, or more frequently as required by manufacturer 5 instructions and/or the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


322 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


III water pressure in the on-site treated non-potable gray water 
supply system within the building exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa), 
a pressure reducing valve reducing the pressure to 80 psi (552 
kPa) or less to water outlets in the building shall be installed. 


у) 1506.6 Initial Cross-Connection Test. A cross-connec- 
tion test is required in accordance with Section 1502.3. Before 
the building is occupied or the system 1s activated, the 
installer shall perform the initial cross-connection test in the 
presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction and other 
authorities having jurisdiction. The test shall be ruled suc- 
cessful by the Authority Having Jurisdiction before final 
approval is granted. 


» 1506.7 On-Site Treated Nonpotable Gray Water Sys- 
tem Materials. On-site treated nonpotable gray water sup- 
ply, and distribution system materials shall comply with the 
requirements of this code for potable water supply and dis- 
tribution systems unless otherwise provided for in this sec- 
tion. 


»» 1506.8 On-Site Treated Nonpotable Gray Water 
Devices and Systems. Devices or equipment used to treat 
on-site treated nonpotable gray water to maintain the mini- 
mum water quality requirements determined by the Author- 

| ity Having Jurisdiction shall be listed and labeled (third-party 
certified) by a listing agency (accredited conformity assess- 
ment body) or approved for the intended application. Devices 
or equipment used to treat on-site treated nonpotable gray 
water for use in the water closet and urinal flushing, surface 
irrigation, and similar applications shall comply with IAPMO 
IGC 324, NSF/ANSI 350 or approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

Уу 1506.9 On-Site Treated Nonpotable Gray Water Sys- 

tem Color and Marking Information. On-site treated 

nonpotable gray water systems shall have a colored back- 
ground and marking information in accordance with Section 

601.3 of this code. 


)) 1506.10 Design and Installation. The design and instal- 
lation of on-site treated nonpotable gray water systems shall 
be in accordance with Section 1506.10.1 through Section 

|| /506.10.6. 


» 1506.10.1 Listing Terms and Installation Instruc- 
tions. On-site treated nonpotable gray water systems 
shall be installed in accordance with the terms of its list- 
ing and the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


» 1506.10.2 Minimum Water Quality. [BSC-CG & 
HCD 1] On-site treated nonpotable gray water supplied 
to toilets or urinals or for other uses in which it is sprayed 
or exposed shall be disinfected. Acceptable disinfection 
methods shall include chlorination, ultraviolet steriliza- 
tion, ozone, or other methods as approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. The minimum water quality for 
on-site treated nonpotable gray water systems shall meet 
the applicable water quality requirements for the 
intended applications as determined by the public health 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. /n the absence of local 
water quality requirements for on-site treated nonpotable 

| gray water, the requirements of IAPMO IGC 324 or 
NSF/ANSI 350 shall apply. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ALTERNATE WATER SOURCES FOR NONPOTABLE APPLICATIONS 


1506.10.3 Deactivation and Drainage. The on-site 
treated nonpotable gray water system and the potable 
water system within the building shall be provided with 
the required appurtenances (e.g., valves, air/vacuum 
relief valves, etc.) to allow for deactivation or drainage as 
required for a cross-connection test in accordance with 
Section 1502.3. 


1506.10.4 Near Underground Potable Water Pipe. 
On-site treated nonpotable gray water pipes shall be per- 
mitted to be run or laid in the same trench as potable 
water pipes with a 12 inch (305 mm) minimum vertical 
and horizontal separation where both pipe materials are 
approved for use within a building. Where piping mate- 
rials do not meet this requirement the minimum separa- 
tion shall be increased to 60 inches (1524 mm). The 
potable water piping shall be installed at an elevation 
above the on-site treated nonpotable gray water piping. 


1506.10.5 Required Filters. A filter permitting the 
passage of particulates no larger than 100 microns (100 
шт) shall be provided for on-site treated nonpotable gray 
water supplied to water closets, urinals, trap primers, and 
drip irrigation systems. 

1506.10.6 Disinfection. Where the intended use of || 
onsite treated nonpotable gray water requires disinfec- 
tion and/or other treatment, on-site treated nonpotable 
gray water shall be disinfected as needed to ensure the 
required water quality is obtained at the point of use. 
Where chlorine is used for disinfection or treatment, 
water shall be tested for residual chlorine in accordance 
with ASTM D1253. 


1506.11 Valves. Valves, except fixture supply control 
valves, shall be equipped with a locking feature. 


1506.12 Signs. Signs in buildings using on-site treated non- 
potable gray water shall comply with Sections 1501.9, 
1501.9.1 and 1501.9.2 and applicable requirements of the Cal- 
ifornia Building Code. 

1506.13 Inspection and Testing. On-site treated non- 
potable gray water systems shall be inspected and tested in 
accordance with Section 1502.1 and/or as required by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


323 


324 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 16 - NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC | Gg |SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 


| 1 [2 |1-АС laci ss ssc 1 18/2 [3/4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X XIX 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
1601.2 
1601.3 & Exceptions 1 & 2 
1601.5 
> 1601.6 
1601.7 
1602.4 & Exceptions 
1602.7 
1603.3 
1603.3.1 & Exception 
1603.4 
1603.4.1 
Table 1603.4 
1603.7 
1603.8 
1603.9 
> 1603.10 A & B 
1603.12 
1603.20 
1604.1 - 1604.3 
1605.3 
1605.3.2 
1605.3.3 X X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


X 


X 


“= | ж ж 
X 


«2 ре ре ре XX X X X XXX XXX OK ж 


«XX ре ре X X X XXX жж 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 325 


326 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 16 
NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


1601.0 General. 


1601.1 Applicability. The provisions of this chapter shall 
apply to the installation, construction, alteration, and repair 
of nonpotable rainwater catchment systems. 


1601.1.1 Allowable Use of Alternate Water. Where 
approved or required by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion, rainwater shall be permitted to be used instead of 
potable water for the applications identified in this chap- 
ter. 


1601.2 System Design. Rainwater catchment systems shall 
be designed in accordance with this chapter by a person reg- 
istered or licensed to perform plumbing design work or who 
demonstrates competency to design the rainwater catchment 
system as required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Components, piping, and fittings used in a rainwater catch- 
ment system shall be listed. 


[HCD 1] Irrigation design plans shall meet the requirements 
of the California Code of Regulations, Title 23, Division 2, 
Chapter 2.7, Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. 


Exceptions: 


(1) A person registered or licensed to perform plumbing 
design work is not required to design rainwater catch- 
ment systems used for irrigation with a maximum storage 
capacity of 360 gallons (1363 L). 


(2) A person registered or licensed to perform plumbing 
design work is not required to design rainwater catch- 
ment systems for single family dwellings where outlets, 
piping, and system components are located on the exte- 
rior of the building. 


1601.3 Permit. It shall be unlawful for a person to construct, 
install, alter, or cause to be constructed, installed, or altered 
a nonpotable rainwater catchment system in a building or on 
a premise without first obtaining a permit to do such work 
from the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Exceptions: 


(1) A permit is not required for exterior rainwater catchment 
systems used for outdoor non-spray irrigation with a 
maximum storage capacity of 5000 gallons (18 927 L) 
where the tank is supported directly upon grade and the 
ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 
1 and it does not require electrical power or a makeup 
water supply connection. 

(2) [HCD 1 & HCD 2] A permit is not required for exterior 
rainwater catchment systems used for spray irrigation 
with a maximum storage capacity of 360 gallons (1363 L). 

1601.4 Component Identification. System components 

shall be properly identified as to the manufacturer. 

1601.5 Maintenance and Inspection. Rainwater catch- 

ment systems and components shall be inspected and main- 

tained in accordance with with the manufacturer’ 
recommendations and/or as required by the enforcing agency. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1601.5 
MINIMUM ALTERNATE WATER SOURCE TESTING, 
INSPECTION, AND MAINTENANCE FREQUENCY 


DESCRIPTION MINIMUM FREQUENCY 


Inspect and clean filters and 
screens, and replace (where 
necessary). 


Every 3 months 


Inspect and verify that 
disinfection, filters, and water 
quality treatment devices and 
systems are operational and 
maintaining minimum water 
quality requirements as 
determined by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


In accordance with manufac- 
turer’s instructions and the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Inspect and clear debris from 
rainwater gutters, downspouts, 
and roof washers. 


Every 6 months 


Inspect and clear debris from 
the roof or another above- 
ground rainwater collection 
surfaces. 


Every 6 months 


Remove tree branches and 
vegetation overhanging a roof 
or other aboveground rainwater 
collection surfaces. 


As needed 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect pumps and verify 
operation. 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect valves and verify 
operation. 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect pressure tanks and 
verify operation. 


Clear debris from and inspect 
storage tanks, locking devices, 
and verify operation. 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect caution labels and 
marking. 


After initial installation and 
every 12 months thereafter 


Cross-connection inspection 
and test.* 


Test water quality of rainwater 
catchment systems required by 
Section 1603.4 to maintain a 


Every 12 months. After system 
renovation or repair. 


minimum water quality. 


* The cross-connection test shall be performed in the presence of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction in accordance with the requirements of this 
chapter. 


1601.5.1 Maintenance Responsibility. The required 
maintenance and inspection of rainwater catchment sys- 
tems shall be the responsibility of the property owner 
unless otherwise required by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


327 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


1601.6 Operation and Maintenance Manual. An oper- 
ation and maintenance manual for rainwater catchment sys- 
tems required to have a permit in accordance with Section 
1601.3, shall be supplied to the building owner by the system 
designer or installer. The operating and maintenance manual 
shall include the following: 


(1) Diagram(s) ofthe entire system and the location of sys- 
tem components. 


(2) Instructions for operating and maintaining the system. 


(3) Instructions on maintaining the required water quality as 
for rainwater catchment systems. 


(4) Details startup, shutdown, and deactivating the system 
for maintenance, repair, or other purposes. 


(5) Applicable testing, inspection, and maintenance fre- 
quencies in accordance with Section 1601.5. 


(6) A method of contacting the installer and/or manufac- 
turer(s). 

(7) Directions to the owner or occupant that the manual 
shall remain with the building throughout the life cycle of 
the structure. 


1601.7 Minimum Water Quality Requirements. The 
minimum water quality for rainwater catchment systems shall 
comply with the applicable water quality requirements for the 
intended application as determined by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. Water quality for nonpotable rainwater catch- 
ment systems shall comply with Section 1603.4. In the 
absence of water quality requirements for harvested rainwa- 
|| rer: Table 1603.4 shall apply. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Water treatment is not required for rainwater catchment 
systems used for aboveground irrigation with a maxi- 
mum storage capacity of 360 gallons (1363 L). 


(2) Water treatment is not required for rainwater catchment 
systems used for surface, subsurface or drip irrigation. 


1601.8 Material Compatibility. Rainwater catchment sys- 
tems shall be constructed of materials that are compatible 
with the type of pipe and fitting materials, water treatment, 
and water conditions in the system. 


1601.9 System Controls. Controls for pumps, valves, and 
other devices that contain mercury that come in contact with 
rainwater supply shall not be permitted. 


1601.10 Separation Requirements. Underground rain- 
water catchment service piping shall be separated from the 
building sewer in accordance with Section 609.2. Treated 
nonpotable water pipes shall be permitted to be run or laid in 
the same trench as potable water pipes with a 12 inch (305 
mm) minimum vertical and horizontal separation where both 
pipe materials are approved for use within a building. Where 
horizontal piping materials do not meet this requirement, the 
minimum separation shall be increased to 60 inches (1524 
mm). The potable water piping shall be installed at an eleva- 
tion above the treated nonpotable water piping. 

1601.11 Abandonment. Rainwater catchment systems that 
are no longer in use, or fail to be maintained in accordance 
with Section 1601.5, shall be abandoned. Abandonment shall 
comply with Section 1601.11.1 and Section 1601.11.2. 


328 


1601.11.1 General. An abandoned system or part 
thereof covered under the scope of this chapter shall be 
disconnected from remaining systems, drained, plugged, 
and capped in an approved manner. 
1601.11.2 Underground Tank. An underground water 
storage tank that has been abandoned or otherwise dis- 
continued from use in a system covered under the scope 
of this chapter shall be completely drained and filled with 
earth, sand, gravel, concrete, or other approved material 
or removed in a manner satisfactory to the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 

1601.12 Sizing. Unless otherwise provided for in this chap- 

ter, rainwater catchment piping shall be sized in accordance 

with Chapter 6 for sizing potable water piping. 


1602.0 Nonpotable Rainwater Catchment Systems. 

1602.1 General. The installation, construction, alteration, 

and repair of rainwater catchments systems intended to sup- 

ply uses such as water closets, urinals, trap primers for floor 
drains and floor sinks, irrigation, industrial processes, water 
features, cooling tower makeup and other uses shall be 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Rainwater 
catchment systems for collecting precipitation from rooftops 

shall comply with ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 63. 

1602.2 Plumbing Plan Submission. No permit for a 

rainwater catchment system shall be issued until complete 

plumbing plans, with data satisfactory to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, have been submitted and approved. 

1602.3 System Changes. No changes or connections shall 

be made to either the rainwater catchment system or the 

potable water system within a site containing a rainwater 
catchment system requiring a permit without approval by the 

Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

1602.4 Connections to Potable or Reclaimed (Recy- 

cled) Water Systems. Rainwater catchment systems shall 

have no direct connection to a potable water supply or alter- 
nate water source system. 

Exceptions: 

(1) Potable water, on-site treated nonpotable gray water, or 
reclaimed (recycled) water is permitted to be used as 
makeup water for a rainwater catchment system provided 
the connection is protected by an air gap in accordance 
with this code. 


(2) A potable water supply may be connected temporarily 
for the initial cross-connection test of the rainwater 
catchment system as required in Section 1605.3.2. 

1602.5 Initial Cross-Connection Test. Where a portion 
ofa rainwater catchment system is installed within a building, 
a cross-connection test is required in accordance with Sec- 
tion 1605.3. Before the building is occupied or the system 1s 
activated, the installer shall perform the initial cross-connec- 
tion test in the presence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
and other authorities having jurisdiction. The test shall be 
ruled successful by the Authority Having Jurisdiction before 
final approval is granted. 

1602.6 Sizing. The design and size of rainwater drains, gut- 

ters, conductors, and leaders shall comply with Chapter 11 of 

this code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


1602.7 Rainwater Catchment System Materials. Rain- 
water catchment system materials shall comply with Section 
1602.7.1 through Section /602.7.3. 


1602.71 Water Supply and Distribution Materi- 
als. Rainwater catchment water supply and distribution 
materials shall comply with the requirements of this code 
for potable water supply and distribution systems unless 
otherwise provided for in this section. 


1602.72 Rainwater Catchment System Drainage 
Materials. Materials used in rainwater catchment 
drainage systems, including gutters, downspouts, con- 
ductors, and leaders shall be in accordance with the 
requirements of this code for storm drainage. 


1602.7.3 Storage Tanks. Rainwater storage tanks shall 
comply with Section 1603.5. 


1602.8 Rainwater Catchment System Color and 
Marking Information. Rainwater catchment systems shall 
have a colored background in accordance with Section 601.3. 
Rainwater catchment systems shall be marked, in lettering in 
accordance with Section 601.3.3, with the words: “CAU- 
TION: NONPOTABLE RAINWATER, DO NOT DRINK.” 


1602.9 Deactivation and Drainage for Cross-Connec- 
tion Test. The rainwater catchment system and the potable 
water system within the building shall be provided with the 
required appurtenances (e.g., valves, air or vacuum relief 
valves, etc.) to allow for deactivation or drainage as required for 
a cross-connection test in accordance with Section 1605.3. 


1603.0 Design and Installation. 


1603.1 Rainwater Catchment Systems. The design and 
installation of nonpotable rainwater catchment systems shall 
be in accordance with Section 1603.2 through Section 1603.20. 


1603.2 Outside Hose Bibbs. Outside hose bibbs shall be 
allowed on rainwater piping systems. Hose bibbs supplying 
rainwater shall be marked with the words: “CAUTION: 
NONPOTABLE RAINWATER, DO NOT DRINK” and in 
Figure 1603.2. 


FIGURE 1603.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


1603.3 Rainwater Catchment Collection Surfaces. «4 
Rainwater shall be collected from roof surfaces or other 
impervious manmade, aboveground collection surfaces. 


1603.3.1 Other Surfaces. Natural precipitation col- << 
lected from surface water runoff, vehicular parking sur- 
faces, or manmade surfaces at or below grade shall be in 
accordance with the water quality requirements for on- 
site treated nonpotable gray water systems in Section 
1506.0. 


Exception: Collected rainwater or storm water used 
exclusively for subsurface landscape irrigation. 


1603.3.2 Prohibited Discharges. Overflows and < 
bleed-off pipes from roof-mounted equipment and appli- 
ances shall not discharge onto roof surfaces that are 
intended to collect rainwater without prior approval from 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


1603.4 Minimum Water Quality. The minimum water << 
quality for harvested rainwater shall meet the applicable water 
quality requirements for the intended applications as deter- 
mined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In the absence of 
water quality requirements determined by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, the minimum treatment and water quality 
shall be in accordance with Table 1603.4, ІАРМО ICC 324 

or NSF/ANSI 350. 


Exception [BSC] : No treatment is required for rainwater 
used for subsurface or nonsprinkled surface irrigation where 
the maximum storage volume is less than 5000 gallons (18 
927 L) where the tank is supported directly upon grade and the 
ratio of height to diameter or width does not exceed 2 to 1. 


1603.4.1 Disinfection. Where the initial quality of the || 
collected rainwater requires disinfection or other treat- 
ment or both, the collected rainwater shall be treated as 
necessary to ensure the required water quality is deliv- 
ered at the point of use. Where chlorine is used for dis- 
infection or treatment, water shall be tested for residual 
chlorine in accordance with ASTM D1253. The levels of 
residual chlorine shall not exceed the levels allowed for 
the intended use in accordance with the requirements of 
the local enforcing agency. == 
1603.5 Rainwater Storage Tanks. Rainwater storage tanks «« 
shall comply with IAPMO/ANSI Z1002 and be installed in 
accordance with Section 1603.6 through Section 1603.12. 
1603.6 Location. Rainwater storage tanks shall be permit- 
ted to be installed above or below grade. 
1603.7 Above Grade. Above grade, storage tanks shall be < 
of an opaque material, approved for aboveground use in direct 
sunlight or shall be shielded from direct sunlight. Tanks shall 
be installed in an accessible location to allow for inspection 
and cleaning. The tank shall be installed on a foundation or 
platform that is constructed to accommodate loads in accor- 
dance with the California Building Code. 
Exception: Tanks may be installed directly on grade in accor- 
dance with Section 1601.3. 
1603.8 Below Grade. Rainwater storage tanks installed «« 
below grade shall be structurally designed to withstand antic- 


329 


» 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


TABLE 1603.4 


MINIMUM WATER QUALITY 


MINIMUM WATER 
APPLICATION MINIMUM TREATMENT QUALITY 
Car washing Debris excluder or other 
approved means in 
accordance with Section 
1603.17, and 100 
microns (100 um) in NIA 
accordance with Section 
1603.18 for drip 
irrigation. 
Surface, Subsurface Debris excluder or 
and drip irrigation other approved means 
in accordance with 
Section 1603.17, and 
100 microns (100 um) ya 
in accordance with 
Section 1603.18 for 
drip irrigation. 
Spray irrigation where | Debris excluder or other 
the maximum storage approved means in 
volume is less than accordance with Section N/A 
360 gallons (1363 L) 1603.17, and disinfec- 
tion in accordance with 
Section 1603.15. 
ру irrigation where Debris excludere Escherichia 
e maximum storage рр means coli: « 100 
volume is equal to or 2. PP : CFU/100 mL, 
in accordance with Sec- SETA 
more than 360 gallons tion 1603.17 and Turbidity: 
(1363 L) viret < 10 МТО 
Urinal and water Debris excluder or other 
closet flushing, approved means in Escherichia 
clothes washing, and | accordance with Section | coli: < 100 
trap priming 1603.17, and 100 CFU/100 mL, 
microns (100 um)in | and Turbidity: 
accordance with Section| < 10 NTU 
1603.18. 
Ornamental fountains Debri Escherichia 
ebris excluder or 9 
and other water other approved. coli: < 100 
features легарргоуес means | CFU/100 mL, 
in accordance with and Turbidity. 
Section 1603.17. <10 NTU 
Cooling tower Debris excluder or other 
make-up water approved means in Escherichia 
accordance with Section | coli: < 100 
1603.17, and 100 CFU/100 mL, 
microns (700 um) іп | and Turbidity: 
accordance with Section < 10 МТО 
1603.18. 


For SI units: 1 micron = 1 um, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 


ipated earth or other loads. Holding tank covers shall be capa- 
ble of supporting an earth load of not less than 300 pounds per 
square foot (Ib/ft?) (1465 kg/m?) where the tank is designed 
for underground installation. Below grade rainwater tanks 
installed underground shall be provided with manholes. 
Below grade storage tanks, located outside of the building, 
shall be provided with either a manhole not less than 24 inches 
(610 mm) square or a manhole with an inside diameter of not 
less than 24 inches (610 mm). Service ports in manhole cov- 
ers shall be not less than 8 inches (203 mm) in diameter. The 
manhole opening shall be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) 
in diameter and located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above 


330 


the surrounding grade. The surrounding grade shall be sloped 
away from the manhole. Underground tanks shall be bal- 
lasted, anchored, or otherwise secured, to prevent the tank 
from floating out of the ground where empty. The combined 
weight of the tank and hold down system shall meet or exceed 
the buoyancy force of the tank. 


1603.9 Drainage and Overflow. Rainwater storage tanks 
shall be provided with a means of draining and cleaning. The 
overflow drain shall not be equipped with a shutoff valve. 
The overflow outlet shall discharge in accordance with this 
code for storm drainage systems. Where discharging to the 
storm drainage system, the overflow drain and tank drain 
shall be protected from backflow of the storm drainage sys- 
tem by a backwater valve or other approved method. Back- 
water valves shall be installed so that access is provided to 
the working parts for service and repair. 


1603.9.1 Overflow Outlet Size. The overflow outlet 
shall be sized to accommodate the flow of the rainwater 
entering the tank and not less than the aggregate cross- 
sectional area of inflow pipes. 


1603.10 Opening and Access Protection. Rainwater 
tank openings shall be protected to prevent the entrance of 
insects, birds, or rodents into the tank and piping systems. 


Rainwater tank access openings exceeding 12 inches 
(305 mm) in diameter shall be secured to prevent tampering 
and unintended entry by either a lockable device or other 
approved method. 


(A) Animals and Insects. Screens installed on vent pipes, 
inlets, and overflow pipes shall have an aperture of not 
greater than 1s of an inch (1.6 mm) and shall be close fit- 
ting. 

(B) Human Access. A minimum of one access opening shall 
be provided to allow inspection and cleaning. Rainwater 
tank manholes and access openings shall be secured by 
either a lockable device or other approved method to pre- 
vent unauthorized access. 


1603.11 Marking. Rainwater tanks shall be permanently 
marked with the capacity and the language: *NONPOTABLE 
RAINWATER.” Where openings are provided to allow a per- 
son to enter the tank, the opening shall be marked with the 
following language: “DANGER-CONFINED SPACE.” 


1603.12 Storage Tank Venting. Where venting using 
drainage or overflow piping 1s not provided or is considered 
insufficient, a vent shall be installed on each tank. The vent 
shall extend from the top of the tank and terminate not less 
than 6 inches (152 mm) above grade and shall be provided 
with a vent sized in accordance with this code, and based on 
the size of the influent pipe. The vent terminal shall be 
directed downward and covered with a #6 of an inch (1.6 
mm) mesh screen to prevent the entry of vermin and insects. 
Tank vent pipes shall not be connected to the sanitary 
drainage system vent. 


1603.13 Pumps. Pumps serving rainwater catchment sys- 
tems shall be listed. Pumps supplying water to water closets, 
urinals, and trap primers shall be capable of delivering not 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


« 


« 


« 


« 


« 


« 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


less than 15 pounds-force per square inch (psi) (103 kPa) 
residual pressure at the highest and most remote outlet served. 
Where the water pressure in the rainwater supply system 
within the building exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa), a pressure 
reducing valve reducing the pressure to 80 psi (552 kPa) or 
less to water outlets in the building shall be installed in accor- 
dance with this code. 


1603.14 Roof Drains. Primary and secondary roof drains, 
conductors, leaders, and gutters shall be designed and 
installed in accordance with this code. 


1603.15 Water Quality Devices and Equipment. 
Devices and equipment used to treat rainwater to maintain 
the minimum water quality requirements determined by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be listed or labeled (third- 
party certified) by a listing agency (accredited conformity 
assessment body) and approved for the intended application. 


1603.16 Freeze Protection. Tanks and piping installed in 
locations subject to freezing shall be provided with an 
approved means of freeze protection. 


1603.17 Debris Removal. The rainwater catchment con- 
veyance system shall be equipped with a debris excluder or 
other approved means to prevent the accumulation of leaves, 
needles, other debris and sediment from entering the storage 
tank. Devices or methods used to remove debris or sediment 
shall be accessible and sized and installed in accordance with 
manufacturer's installation instructions. 


1603.18 Required Filters. A filter permitting the passage 
of particulates not larger than 100 microns (100 um) shall be 
provided for rainwater supplied to water closets, urinals, trap 
primers, and drip irrigation systems. 


1603.19 Roof Gutters. Gutters shall maintain a minimum 
slope and be sized in accordance with Section 1103.3. 


1603.20 Rainwater Diversion Valves. Rainwater diver- 
sion valves ranging from 2 inches (50 mm) through 12 inches 
(300 mm) in diameter shall be an approved diverter valve. 
Valves shall be readily accessible and include a filter located 
upstream of the valve when required. 


1604.0 Signs. 


1604.1 General. Signs in buildings using rainwater shall be 
in accordance with Section 1604.2 and Section 1604.3, and 
applicable requirements of the California Building Code. 


1604.2 Commercial, Industrial, Institutional and Res- 
idential Restroom Signs. A sign shall be installed in rest- 
rooms in commercial, industrial, and institutional 
occupancies, and in residential common use areas using non- 
potable rainwater for water closets, urinals, or both. Signs 
shall comply with all applicable requirements of the Califor- 
nia Building Code. Each sign shall contain the following text: 
TO CONSERVE WATER, THIS BUILDING USES RAIN- 
WATER TO FLUSH TOILETS AND URINALS. 

1604.3 Equipment Room Signs. Each equipment room 
containing nonpotable rainwater equipment shall have a sign 
posted with the following wording in 1 inch (25.4 mm) let- 
ters: 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


CAUTION NONPOTABLE RAINWATER, DO NOT 
DRINK. DO NOT CONNECT TO DRINKING WATER 
SYSTEM. NOTICE: CONTACT BUILDING MANAGE- 
MENT BEFORE PERFORMING ANY WORK ON THIS 
WATER SYSTEM. 


This sign shall be posted in a location that is visible to 
anyone working on or near rainwater equipment. 


1605.0 Inspection and Testing. 


1605.1 General. Rainwater catchment systems shall be 
inspected and tested in accordance with Section 1605.2 and 
Section 1605.3. 


1605.2 Supply System Inspection and Test. Rainwater 
catchment systems shall be inspected and tested in accordance 
with the applicable provisions of this code for testing of potable 
water and storm drainage systems. Storage tanks shall be filled 
with water to the overflow opening for a period of 24 hours, 
and during the inspection, or by other means as approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. Seams and joints shall be 
exposed during the inspection and checked for watertightness. 


1605.3 Cross-Connection Inspection and Testing. An 
initial visual inspection and an initial cross-connection test 
shall be performed on both the potable and rainwater catch- 
ment water systems before the initial operation of the rain- 
water catchment system. During an initial or subsequent 
cross-connection test, the potable and rainwater catchment 
water systems shall be isolated from each other and inde- 
pendently inspected and tested to ensure there 1s no cross- 
connection in accordance with Section 1602.5. Initial or 
subsequent inspections or tests shall be performed in accor- 
dance with Section 1605.3.1 through Section /605.3.3. 


1605.3.1 Visual System Inspection. Prior to com- 

mencing the cross-connection testing, a dual system 

inspection shall be conducted by the Authority Having 

Jurisdiction and other authorities having jurisdiction as 

follows: 

(1) Pumps, equipment, equipment room signs, and 
exposed piping in an equipment room shall be 
checked. 


1605.3.2 Cross-Connection Test. 4 cross-connec- 
tion test shall be performed in the presence of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction or other authorities hav- 
ing jurisdiction to determine whether a cross-connection 
has occurred as follows: 


(1) The potable water system shall be activated and 
pressurized. The rainwater catchment water system 
shall be shut down and completely drained. 

(2) The potable water system shall remain pressurized 
for a minimum period of time specified by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction while the rainwater 
catchment water system is empty. The minimum 
period the rainwater catchment water system is to 
remain depressurized shall be determined on a case- 
by-case basis, taking into account the size and com- 
plexity of the potable and rainwater catchment water 
distribution systems, but in no case shall that period 
be less than 1 hour. 


331 


NONPOTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


332 


(3) Fixtures, potable, and rainwater shall be tested and 
inspected for flow. Flow from a rainwater catchment 
water system outlet shall indicate a cross-connec- 
tion. No flow from a potable water outlet shall indi- 
cate that it is connected to the rainwater system. 


(4 


— 


The drain on the rainwater catchment water system 
shall be checked for flow during the test and at the 
end of the period. 


(5 


— 


The potable water system shall then be completely 
drained. 


(6 


— 


The rainwater catchment water system shall then be 
activated and pressurized. When rainwater is not 
available for the initial cross-connection test, a tem- 
porary connection to a potable water supply shall 
be required. At the conclusion of the initial cross- 
connection test, the temporary connection to the 
potable water supply shall be disconnected. 


(7 


— 


The rainwater catchment water system shall remain 
pressurized for a minimum period of time specified 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction while the 
potable water system is empty. The minimum period 
the potable water system is to remain depressurized 
shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, but in 
no case shall that period be less than 1 hour. 


(8 


— 


Fixtures, potable and rainwater catchment, shall be 
tested and inspected for flow. Flow from a potable 
water system outlet shall indicate a cross-connec- 
tion. No flow from a rainwater catchment water out- 
let shall indicate that it is connected to the potable 
water system. 

(9) The drain on the potable water system shall be 
checked for flow during the test and at the end of the 
period. 

(10) Where there is no flow detected in the fixtures which 
would indicate a cross-connection, the potable water 
system shall be repressurized. 

1605.3.3 Discovery of Cross-Connection. In the 

event that a cross-connection is discovered, the following 

procedure, in the presence of the Authority Having Juris- 
diction, shall be activated immediately: 

(1) Rainwater catchment piping to the building shall be 
shutdown at the supply source(s), and the rainwater 
riser shall be drained. 

(2) Potable water piping to the building shall be shut- 
down at the meter. 

(3) The cross-connection shall be uncovered and dis- 

connected. 


(4 


— 


The building shall be retested following procedures 
listed in Section 1605.3.1 and Section 1605.3.2. 


The potable water system shall be chlorinated with 
50 ppm chlorine for 24 hours. 


The potable water system shall be flushed after 24 
hours, and a standard bacteriological test shall be 
performed. Where test results are acceptable, the 
potable water system shall be permitted to be 
recharged. 


(5 


— 


(6 


— 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
CHAPTER 17 - REFERENCED STANDARDS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 

Adopting Agency BSC cg SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR (СЕС CA | SL |SLC 
| 1 |2 |1-АС AC|ss|ss/cc 1 18| 2 [3/4 [5/6 

Adopt Entire Chapter X 

Adopt Entire Chapter as 

amended (amended X X X X X XIX XXIX X 

sections listed below) 

Adopt only those sections 

that are listed below 

Chapter/Section 

Table 1701.1 X X XX X X XIXIX XX 

Table 1701.2 X X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 333 


334 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CHAPTER 17 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
1701.0 General. date, the title, application and the section(s) of this code that 
1701.1 Standards. The standards listed in Table 1701.1 are references the standard. The application of the referenced 
referenced in various sections of this code and shall be con- standard(s) shall be as specified in Section 301.2.2. The 
sidered part of the requirements of this document. The stan- promulgating agency acronyms referred to in Table 1701.1 
dards are listed herein by the standard number and effective are defined in a list found at the end ofthe tables. 


TABLE 1701.1 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION rise 
AAMI 
ANSI/AAMI/ISO 23500-2 | Preparation and Quality Management of Fluids for Miscellaneous 614.7 
Haemodialysis and Related Therapies—Part 2: Water Treat- 
ment Equipment for Hemodialysis Applications 
ANSI/AAMI/ISO 23500-3 Preparation and Quality Management of Fluids for Miscellaneous 614.7 
Haemodialysis and Related Therapies—Part 3: Water for 
Haemodialysis and Related Therapies. 
ARCSA 
ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 63-  |Rainwater Catchment Systems Miscellaneous 1602.1 
2020 
ASME 
ASME A112.1.2-2012 Air Gaps in Plumbing Systems (For Plumbing Fixtures and Fittings Table 603.2 
(R2017) Water-Connected Receptors) 
ASME A112.1.3-2000 Air Gap Fittings for Use with Plumbing Fixtures, Appliances, _ | Fittings Table 603.2 
(R2019) and Appurtenances 
ASME A112.3.1-2007 Stainless Steel Drainage Systems for Sanitary DWV, Storm, Piping 418.1, Table 701.2, 
(R2017) and Vacuum Applications, Above- and Below-Ground 705.7.2, 1102.1 
ASME A112.3.4-2018/CSA | Macerating Toilet Systems and Waste-Pumping Systems for Fixtures 710.13 
B45.9-2018 Plumbing Fixtures 
ASME A112.4.1-2009 Water Heater Relief Valve Drain Tubes Appliances 608.5(2) 
(R2019) 
ASME A112.4.2-2021/CSA |Personal Hygiene Devices for Water Closets Fixtures 411.4 
B45.16-2021 
ASME A112.4.4-2017 Plastic Push-Fit Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Fittings Fittings Table 701.2 
ASME A112.4.14- Manually Operated Valves for Use in Plumbing Systems Valves 606.1 
2017/CSA B125.14-2017 
ASME A112.6.1M-1997 Floor-Affixed Supports for Off-the-Floor Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 402.4 
(R2017) for Public Use 
ASME A112.6.2-2017 Framing-Affixed Supports (Carriers) for Off-the-Floor Plumb- |Fixtures 402.4 
ing Fixtures 
ASME A112.6.3-2019 Floor and Trench Drains Fixtures 418.1 
ASME A112.6.4-2003 Roof, Deck, and Balcony Drains Fixtures 1102.1 
(R2012) 
ASME A112.6.7-2010 Sanitary Floor Sinks Fixtures 421.1 
(R2019) 
ASME A112.6.9-2005 Siphonic Roof Drains DWV Components 1106.3 
(R2019) 
ASME A112.14.1-2003 Backwater Valves Valves 710.6 
(R2017) 
ASME A112.14.3-2018 Hydromechanical Grease Interceptors Fixtures 1014.1, Table 1009.1 
ASME A112.14.4-2001 Grease Removal Devices Fixtures 1014.1, Table 1009.1 
(R2017) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 335 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION rischi 

ASME A112.14.6-2010 FOG (Fats, Oils, and Greases) Disposal Systems Fixtures 1015.2, Table 1009.1 

(R2019) 

ASME A112.18.1- Plumbing Supply Fittings Fittings 408.4, 417.1, 417.2, 

2018/CSA B125.1-2018 417.3, 417.4, 417.6, 
603.5.20 

ASME A112.18.2- Plumbing Waste Fittings Fittings 404.1, 408.5 

2020/CSA B125.2-2020 

ASME A112.18.3-2002 Backflow Protection Devices and Systems in Plumbing Fixture |Backflow Protection |417.3, 417.4 

(R2017) Fittings 

ASME A112.18.6-2017/ Flexible Water Connectors Piping 604.5, 604.13 

CSA B125.6-2017 (R2021) 

ASME A112.18.8-2020 Sanitary Waste Valves for Plumbing Drainage Systems Sanitary Waste 814.4 

Valves 

ASME A112.18.9-2011 Protectors/Insulators for Exposed Waste and Supplies on Miscellaneous 403.3 

(R2017) Accessible Fixtures 

ASME A112.19.1- Enameled Cast Iron and Enameled Steel Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 

2018/CSA B45.2-2018 415.1, 420.1 

ASME A112.19.2- Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 

2018/CSA B45.1-2018 410.1, 411.1, 412.1, 
415.1, 420.1 

ASME A112.19.3- Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 

2017/CSA B45.4-2017 410.1, 411.1, 415.1, 
420.1 

ASME A112.19.5- Flush Valves and Spuds for Water Closets, Urinals, and Tanks |Fixtures 413.3 

2017/CSA B45.15-2017 

ASME A112.19.7- Hydromassage Bathtub Systems Fixtures 409.1, 409.6.1 

2020/CSA B45.10-2020 

ASME A112.19.12-2014 Wall Mounted, Pedestal Mounted, Adjustable, Elevating, Tilt- |Fixtures 407.1, 420.1 

(R2019) ing, and Pivoting Lavatory, Sink, and Shampoo Bowl Carrier 

Systems and Drain Waste Systems 

ASME A112.19.14-2013 Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device | Fixtures 411.2.1 

(R2018) 

ASME A112.19.15-2012 Bathtubs/Whirlpool Bathtubs with Pressure Sealed Doors Fixtures 409.1 

(R2017) 

ASME A112.19.19-2016 Vitreous China Nonwater Urinals Fixtures 412.1, 412.1.2 


(R2021) 


ASSE 1002-2020/ASME 
A112.1002-2020/CSA 
B125.12-2020 


Anti-Siphon Fill Valves for Water Closet Tanks 


Backflow Protection 


413.3, Table 603.2 


ASME A112.36.2M-1991  |Cleanouts DWV Components |Table 707.2, 707.4.1 
(R2017) 
ASSE 1016-2017/ASME Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and — | Valves 408.4, 408.4.2(1) 


A112.1016-2017/CSA 
B125.16-2017 


Tub/Shower Combinations 


ASSE 1037-2020/ASME 
A112.1037-2020/CSA 
B125.37-2020 


Pressurized Flushing Devices for Plumbing Fixtures 


Backflow Protection 


413.2 


ASSE 1070-2020/ASME Water Temperature Limiting Devices Valves 407.3(1), 409.4(1), 

A112.1070-2020/CSA 410.3(1), 417.70), 

B125.70-2020 417.8 

ASME ВІ.20.1-2013 Pipe Threads, General Purpose (Inch) Joints 605.1.5, 605.2.3, 

(R2018) 605.5.2, 605.12.3, 
705.1.3, 705.3.4, 
705.4.2, 705.6.3, 
1208.5.8, 1322.5(2) 

ASME B16.1-2020 Gray Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Classes 25, 125, Fittings 1208.5.11.1 


and 250 


336 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION оно 
ASME B16.3-2021 Malleable Iron Threaded Fittings: Classes 150 and 300 Fittings Table 604.1, 
Table 701.2 

ASME B16.4-2021 Gray Iron Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 250 Fittings Table 604.1 

ASME B16.5-2020 Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: NPS ^ through NPS 24 Fittings 1208.5.11.2(1) 
Metric/Inch 

ASME B16.12-2019 Cast Iron Threaded Drainage Fittings Fittings Table 701.2 

ASME B16.15-2018 Cast Copper Alloy Threaded Fittings: Classes 125 and 250 Fittings Table 604.1 

ASME B16.18-2018 Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Pressure Fittings Fittings Table 604.1 

ASME B16.20-2017 Metallic Gaskets for Pipe Flanges Joints 1208.5.12.2 

ASME B16.21-2021 Nonmetallic Flat Gaskets for Pipe Flanges Joints 1208.5.12.3 

АЅМЕ В16.22-2018 Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Pressure Fit- Fittings Table 604.1, 1321.1 
tings 

ASME B16.23-2016 Cast Copper Alloy Solder Joint Drainage Fittings: DWV Fittings Table 701.2 

ASME B16.24-2016 Cast Copper Alloy Pipe Flanges, Flanged Fittings, and Valves: |Fittings 1208.5.11.3 
Classes 150, 300, 600, 900, 1500, and 2500 

ASME B16.26-2018 Cast Copper Alloy Fittings for Flared Copper Tubes Fittings Table 604.1 

ASME B16.29-2017 Wrought Copper and Wrought Copper Alloy Solder-Joint Fittings Table 701.2 
Drainage Fittings - DWV 

ASME B16.33-2012 Manually Operated Metallic Gas Valves for Use in Gas Piping | Valves Table 1208.13 

(R2017) Systems Up to 175 psi (Sizes NPS 2 through NPS 2) 

ASME B16.34-2020 Valves-Flanged, Threaded, and Welding End Valves 606.1 

ASME B16.42-2016 Ductile Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Classes 150 Fuel Gas Piping 1208.5.11.4 
and 300 

ASME B16.44-2012 Manually Operated Metallic Gas Valves for Use in Above Valves Table 1208.13 

(R2017) Ground Piping Systems up to 5 psi 

ASME B16.47-2020 Large Diameter Steel Flanges: NPS 26 through NPS 60 Met- __| Fittings 1208.5.11.2(2) 
ric/Inch 

ASME B16.50-2018 Wrought Copper and Copper Alloy Braze-Joint Pressure Fit- _| Fittings Table 604.1, 1321.1, 
tings 1321.11 

ASME B16.51-2018 Copper and Copper Alloy Press-Connect Pressure Fittings Fittings Table 604.1 

ASME B31.3-2020 Process Piping Piping 1308.2(9) 

ASME B36.10M-2018 Welded and Seamless Wrought Steel Pipe Fuel Gas, Piping 1208.5.2.2 


ASME BPVC Section Rules for Construction of Pressure Vessels - Division 1 Miscellaneous 505.4, 1309.5(2), 
VIII.1-2021 1310.42), 1312.3(2) 
ASME BPVC Section IX- Welding, Brazing, and Fusing Qualifications - Qualification Miscellaneous 1322.1.1, 1322.2.1, 


2021 Standard for Welding, Brazing, and Fusing Procedures; 1323.11 
Welders; Brazers; and Welding, Brazing, and Fusing Operators 

ASPE 

ASPE/ANSI 45-2018 Siphonic Roof Drainage Storm Drainage 1106.2 

ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 63-  |Rainwater Catchment Systems Miscellaneous 1602.1 

2020 

ASSE 

ASSE 1001-2017 Atmospheric Type Vacuum Breakers Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 


ASSE 1002-2020/ASME 
A112.1002-2020/CSA 


B125.12-2020 


Anti-Siphon Fill Valves for Water Closet Tanks 


Backflow Protection 


413.3, Table 603.2 


ASSE 1003-2020° Water Pressure Reducing Valves for Potable Water Distribution | Valves 608.2 
Systems 

ASSE 1004-2017 Commercial Dishwashing Machines Backflow Protection |414.2 

ASSE 1008-2020 Plumbing Aspects of Residential Food Waste Disposer Units | Appliances 419.1 

ASSE 1010-2004 Water Hammer Arresters Appliances 609.11 

ASSE 1011-2017 Hose Connection Vacuum Breakers Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


337 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION pic 
ASSE 1012-2009 Backflow Preventers with an Intermediate Atmospheric Vent — Backflow Protection | Table 603.2 
ASSE 1013-2021 Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assemblies | Backflow Protection | Table 603.2 
ASSE 1014-2020 Backflow Prevention Devices for Hand-Held Showers Backflow Protection |417.3 
ASSE 1015-2021 Double Check Backflow Prevention Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 


ASSE 1016-2017/ASME Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and — | Valves 408.4, 408.4.2(1) 

A112.1016-2017/CSA Tub/Shower Combinations 

B125.16-2017 

ASSE 1018-2001 (R2021) Trap Seal Primer Valves - Potable Water Supplied Valves 1007.2 

ASSE 1019-2011 (R2016) | Wall Hydrant with Backflow Protection and Freeze Resistance | Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 

ASSE 1020-2020 Pressure Vacuum Breaker Assemblies Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 

ASSE 1022-2021 Backflow Preventer for Beverage Dispensing Equipment Backflow Protection | Table 603.2, 
603.5.12 

ASSE 1023-2020 Electrically Heated or Cooled Water Dispensers Appliances 417.6 


ASSE 1024-2017 (R2021) 


Dual Check Backflow Preventers 


Backflow Protection 


Table 603.2, 603.5.12 


ASSE 1032-2004 (R2021) 


Dual Check Valve Type Backflow Preventers for Carbonated 
Beverage Dispensers, Post Mix Type 


Backflow Protection 


603.5.12 


ASSE 1035-2020 Laboratory Faucet Backflow Preventers Backflow Protection | Table 603.2, 
603.3.11 
ASSE 1037-2020/ASME Pressurized Flushing Devices for Plumbing Fixtures Backflow Protection |413.2 
A112.1037-2020/CSA 
B125.37-2020 
ASSE 1044-2015 (R2020) Trap Seal Primer - Drainage Types and Electric Design Types |DWV Components | 1007.2 
ASSE 1047-2021 Reduced Pressure Detector Backflow Prevention Assemblies _| Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
ASSE 1048-2021 Double Check Detector Backflow Prevention Assemblies Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
ASSE 1052-2016 Hose Connection Backflow Preventers Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
ASSE 1053-2019 Dual Check Backflow Preventer Wall Hydrants — Freeze Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
Resistant Type 
ANSI/CAN/ASSE/IAPMO  |Chemical Dispensers with Integral Backflow Protection Backflow Protection |Table 603.2, 
1055-2020 603.5.22(1) 
ASSE 1056-2013 (R2021) | Spill Resistant Vacuum Breaker Assemblies Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
ASSE 1057-2012 Freeze Resistant Sanitary Yard Hydrants with Backflow Pro- — Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
tection 
ASSE 1060-2017 Outdoor Enclosures for Fluid Conveying Components with Miscellaneous 603.4.7 
Errata dated February 1, 2019 
ASSE 1061-2020 Push-Fit Fittings Fittings Table 604.1, 
605.1.3.3, 605.2.1.1, 
605.3.2.1, 605.9.3 
ASSE 1062-2017 (R2021) Temperature Actuated, Flow Reduction (TAFR) Valves for Valves 408.4.3, 417.7(3) 


Individual Supply Fittings 


ASSE 1064-2020 


Backflow Prevention Assembly Field Test Kits 


Backflow Protection 


603.4.2 


ASSE 1069-2020 Automatic Temperature Control Mixing Valves Valves 408.4.1, 408.4.2(2) 
ASSE 1070-2020/ASME Water Temperature Limiting Devices Valves 407.3(1), 409.4(1), 
A112.1070-2020/CSA 410.3(1), 417.7(1), 
B125.70-2020 417.8 
ASSE 1071-2012 (R2021) Temperature Actuated Mixing Valves for Plumbed Emergency | Valves 416.2 

Equipment 
ASSE 1079-2012 (R2021) Dielectric Pipe Unions Fittings 605.15, 605.16.1, 

605.16.3 

ASSE 1081-2014 (R2020) | Backflow Preventers with Integral Pressure Reducing Boiler _| Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 


Feed Valve and Intermediate Atmospheric Vent Style for 
Domestic and Light Commercial Water Distribution Systems 


338 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION 816001560 

ASSE 1084-2018°! Water Heaters with Temperature Limiting Capacity Appliances 407.3(2), 409.4(2), 
410.3(2), 417.7(2), 
417.8 

ASSE 1085-2018 Water Heaters for Emergency Equipment Appliances 416.2 

ASSE 1087-2018 Commercial and Food Service Water Treatment Equipment Water Conditioning, |Table 611.1 

Utilizing Drinking Water Water Treatment 

ASSE 1099-2021/WSC PST |Pressurized Water Storage Tanks Valves 607.2 

2000-2021 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Cross-Connection Control Professional Qualifications Standard | Certification 603.2, 603.4.2 

5000-2015 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6010- | Medical Gas Systems Installers Certification 1323.10 

2021 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020- | Medical Gas Systems Inspectors Miscellaneous 1324.5.4.7, 

2021 1324.5.6.2, 1324.5.6.5 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030- |Medical Gas Systems Verifiers Miscellaneous 1324.5.4.7, 

2021 1324.5.62, 
1324.5.6.5, 
1324.5.7.2 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6035- |Bulk Medical Gas/Cryogenic Fluid Central Supply Systems Miscellaneous 1324.5.7.3 

2021 Verifiers 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler System Installers & ^ Miscellaneous 612.1 

7000-2020 Inspectors for One- and Two-Family Dwellings 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Environment of Care, Infection Control and Construction Risk |Professional 1303.9 

12010-2021 Assessment Professional Qualification Standard Qualifications 

ASSP 

ASSP Z359.1-2020 The Fall Protection Code Miscellaneous 508.2.1.1 

ASTM 

ASTM A53/A53M-2020 Standard Specification for Pipe, Steel, Black and Hot-Dipped, |Piping Table 604.1, Table 

Zinc-Coated, Welded and Seamless 701.2, 1208.5.2.2(1) 

ASTM A74-2021 Standard Specification for Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings Piping 301.2.4, Table 701.2 

ASTM A106/A106M-2019a |Standard Specification for Seamless Carbon Steel Pipe for Piping 1208.5.2.2(2) 

High-Temperature Service 

ASTM A254/A254M-2012 |Standard Specification for Copper-Brazed Steel Tubing Piping 1208.5.3.1 

(R2019) 

ASTM A268/A268M-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded Ferritic and _| Piping 1208.5.3.2(1) 

Martensitic Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service 

ASTM A269/A269M-2015a | Standard Specification for Seamless and Welded Austenitic Piping Table 604.1, 

(R2019) Stainless Steel Tubing for General Service 1208.5.3.2(2), 
1319.1(2)(a) 

ASTM A312/A312M-2021 |Standard Specification for Seamless, Welded, and Heavily Piping Table 604.1, 

Cold Worked Austenitic Stainless Steel Pipes 1208.5.2.2(3), 
1319.1(2)(b), 
1319.1(2)(c) 

ASTM A403/A403M-2020 | Standard Specification for Wrought Austenitic Stainless Steel | Fittings 1319.1(2)(c) 

Piping Fittings 

ASTM A554-2021 Standard Specification for Welded Stainless Steel Mechanical | Piping Table 604.1 

Tubing 

ASTM A778-2016 (R2021) |Standard Specification for Welded, Unannealed Austenitic Piping Table 604.1 

Stainless Steel Tubular Products 

ASTM A861-2004 (R2017) |Standard Specification for High-Silicon Iron Pipe and Fittings | Piping 811.2 

ASTM А888-2021а Standard Specification for Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Piping 301.2.4, Table 701.2, 

Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste, and Vent Piping Table 707.2 


Applications 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


339 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION EE ROT 
ASTM A1056-2020 Standard Specification for Cast Iron Couplings used for Joining |Fittings 705.2.2 
Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM B32-2020 Standard Specification for Solder Metal Joints 605.1.4, 705.3.3 
ASTM B42-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Pipe, Standard Sizes | Piping Table 604.1 
ASTM B43-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless Red Brass Pipe, Standard |Piping Table 604.1, 
Sizes Table 701.2 
ASTM B75/B75M-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Tube Piping Table 604.1, 
Table 701.2 
ASTM B88-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Water Tube Piping Table 604.1, 604.4, 
903.2.3, 1208.5.3.3, 
1319.1(1)(a) 
ASTM B135/B135M-2017 |Standard Specification for Seamless Brass Tube Piping Table 604.1 
ASTM B152/B152M-2019 | Standard Specification for Copper Sheet, Strip, Plate, and Miscellaneous 408.8.4 
Rolled Bar 
ASTM B210/B210M-2019a | Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Piping 1208.5.3.4 
Drawn Seamless Tubes 
ASTM B241/B241M-2016 Standard Specification for Aluminum and Aluminum-Alloy Piping 1208.5.2.4, 
Seamless Pipe and Seamless Extruded Tube 1208.5.3.4 
ASTM B251/B251M-2017 Standard Specification for General Requirements for Wrought |Piping Table 604.1, 
Seamless Copper and Copper-Alloy Tube Table 701.2 
ASTM B280-2020 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Tube for Air Con- |Piping 1208.5.3.3, 
ditioning and Refrigeration Field Service 1319.1(1)(b) 
ASTM B302-2017 Standard Specification for Threadless Copper Pipe, Standard — |Piping Table 604.1, 
Sizes Table 701.2 
ASTM B306-2020 Standard Specification for Copper Drainage Tube (DWV) Piping Table 701.2, 903.2.3 
ASTM B447-2012a (R2021) Standard Specification for Welded Copper Tube Piping Table 604.1 
ASTM B813-2016 Standard Specification for Liquid and Paste Fluxes for Solder- |Joints 605.1.4, 705.3.3 
ing of Copper and Copper Alloy Tube 
ASTM B819-2019 Standard Specification for Seamless Copper Tube for Medical | Piping 1318.4, 1318.5, 
Gas Systems 1319.1(1)(c), 
1319.1.1 
ASTM B828-2016 Standard Practice for Making Capillary Joints by Soldering of  |Joints 605.1.4, 705.3.3 
Copper and Copper Alloy Tube and Fittings 
ASTM C4-2004 (R2018) Standard Specification for Clay Drain Tile and Perforated Clay | Piping Table 1101.4.6 
Drain Tile 
ASTM C425-2021 Standard Specification for Compression Joints for Vitrified Joints 705.8.1 
Clay Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM C564-2020a Standard Specification for Rubber Gaskets for Cast Iron Soil — |Joints 705.2.2 
Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM C700-2018 Standard Specification for Vitrified Clay Pipe, Extra Strength, |Piping Table 701.2, 
Standard Strength, and Perforated Table 1101.4.6 
ASTM C1053-2000 (R2015) | Standard Specification for Borosilicate Glass Pipe and Fittings | Piping 811.2 
for Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Applications 
ASTM C1173-2018 Standard Specification for Flexible Transition Couplings for Fittings 705.10 
Underground Piping Systems 
ASTM C1277-2020 Standard Specification for Shielded Couplings Joining Hubless | Fixtures 301.2.4, 705.2.2 
Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM C1460-2021 Standard Specification for Shielded Transition Couplings for |Јоіпіѕ 705.10 
Use With Dissimilar DWV Pipe and Fittings Above Ground 
ASTM C1461-2021 Standard Specification for Mechanical Couplings Using Ther- |Joints 705.10 


moplastic Elastomeric (TPE) Gaskets for Joining Drain, Waste, 
and Vent (DWV), Sewer, Sanitary, and Storm Plumbing Sys- 
tems for Above and Below Ground Use 


340 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION ENT 

ASTM C1540-2020 Standard Specification for Heavy-Duty Shielded Couplings Joints 705.2.2 

Joining Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM C1563-2008 Standard Test Method for Gaskets for Use in Connection with |Joints 705.2.2 
(R2021) Hub and Spigot Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary 

Drain, Waste, Vent, and Storm Piping Applications 
ASTM C1822-2021 Standard Specification for Insulating Covers on Accessible Miscellaneous 403.3 


Lavatory Piping 


ASTM D1253-2014 


Standard Test Method for Residual Chlorine in Water 


Miscellaneous 


1506.10.6, 1603.4.1 


ASTM D1785-2021a Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic |Piping Table 604.1, Table 
Pipe, Schedules 40, 80, and 120 701.2 

ASTM D2235-2021 Standard Specification for Solvent Cement for Acrylonitrile- — |Joints 705.1.2 
Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) Plastic Pipe and Fittings 

ASTM D2239-2021 Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe Piping Table 604.1 
(SIDR-PR) Based on Controlled Inside Diameter 

ASTM D2241-2020 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pressure- | Piping Table 604.1 
Rated Pipe (SDR Series) 

ASTM D2464-2015 Standard Specification for Threaded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Fittings Table 604.1 
(PVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 

ASTM D2466-2021 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic |Fittings Table 604.1 
Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40 

ASTM D2467-2020 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic |Fittings Table 604.1 
Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 

ASTM D2513-2020 Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Gas Pressure Piping 1208.5.4, 1208.5.6.2, 
Pipe, Tubing, and Fittings 1208.5.10.2, 

1210.1.7.1(1) 

ASTM D2564-2020 Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Poly (Vinyl Joints 605.12.2, 705.6.2 
Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Piping Systems 

ASTM D2609-2021 Standard Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings for Polyethylene |Fittings Table 604.1 
(PE) Plastic Pipe 

ASTM D2661-2021 Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene Piping Table 701.2, Table 
(ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe and 707.2 
Fittings 

ASTM D2665-2020 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic | Piping Table 701.2, Table 
Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe and Fittings 707.2 

ASTM D2680-2020 Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene Piping Table 701.2 
(ABS) and Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Composite Sewer Piping 

ASTM D2683-2020 Standard Specification for Socket-Type Polyethylene Fittings | Fittings Table 604.1 
for Outside Diameter-Controlled Polyethylene Pipe and Tubing 

ASTM D2729-2017 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Sewer | Piping Table 701.2, 
Pipe and Fittings Table 1101.4.6 

ASTM D2737-2021 Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Tubing Piping, Plastic Table 604.1 


ASTM D2846/D2846M- Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) | Piping Table 604.1, 605.2.2, 
2019a (CPVC) Plastic Hot- and Cold-Water Distribution Systems 605.3.1 
ASTM D3034-2016 Standard Specification for Type PSM Poly (Vinyl Chloride) Piping, Plastic Table 701.2 
(PVC) Sewer Pipe and Fittings 
ASTM D3035-2021 Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (DR- | Piping Table 604.1 
PR) Based on Controlled Outside Diameter 
ASTM D3138-2004 Standard Specification for Solvent Cement for Transition Joints | Joints 705.9.4 
(R2016) Between Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene (ABS) and Poly 
(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Non-Pressure Piping Components 
ASTM D3139-2019 Standard Specification for Joints for Plastic Pressure Pipes Joints 605.12.1 
Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals 
ASTM D3212-2020 Standard Specification for Joints for Drain and Sewer Plastic — |Joints 705.1.1, 705.6.1 


Pipes Using Flexible Elastomeric Seals 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


341 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION REFERE ED 
ASTM D3261-2016 Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) |Fittings Table 604.1 
Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe and Tubing 
ASTM D4068-2017 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Polyethylene (CPE) Miscellaneous 408.8.2 
Sheeting for Concealed Water-Containment Membrane 
ASTM D4551-2017 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic | Miscellaneous 408.8.1 
Flexible Concealed Water-Containment Membrane 
ASTM D6104-1997 Standard Practice for Determining the Performance of Interceptors Table 1009.1 
(R2017)°! Oil/Water Separators Subjected to Surface Run-Off 
ASTM E84-2021a Standard Test Method for Surface Burning Characteristics of | Miscellaneous 701.2(2), 903.1(2), 
Building Materials 1101.4 
ASTM E119-2020 Standard Test Methods for Fire Tests of Building Construction | Miscellaneous 1404.3, 1405.3 
and Materials 
ASTM E814-2013a (R2017) |Standard Test Method for Fire Tests of Penetration Firestop Miscellaneous 1404.3, 1405.3 


Systems 


ASTM F409-2017 Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Accessible and Piping, Plastic 404.1 
Replaceable Plastic Tube and Tubular Fittings 

ASTM F437-2021 Standard Specification for Threaded Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl | Fittings Table 604.1 
Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 

ASTM F438-2017 Standard Specification for Socket-Type Chlorinated Poly Fittings Table 604.1 
(Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40 

ASTM F439-2019 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) | Fittings Table 604.1 
(CPVC) Plastic Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 

ASTM F441/F441M-2020 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) | Piping Table 604.1 
(CPVC) Plastic Pipe, Schedules 40 and 80 

ASTM F442/F442M-2020 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) | Piping Table 604.1, 605.2.2 
(CPVC) Plastic Pipe (SDR-PR) 

ASTM F493-2020 Standard Specification for Solvent Cements for Chlorinated Joints 605.2.2, 605.3.1 
Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings 

ASTM F628-20129 Standard Specification for Acrylonitrile-Butadiene-Styrene Piping Table 701.2 
(ABS) Schedule 40 Plastic Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe with a 
Cellular Core 

ASTM F656-2021 Standard Specification for Primers for Use in Solvent Cement | Joints 605.2.2, 605.3.1, 


Joints of Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic Pipe and Fittings 


605.12.2, 705.6.2 


ASTM F667/F667M-2016 
(R2021) 


Standard Specification for 3 through 24 in. Corrugated Polyeth- 
ylene Pipe and Fittings 


Piping, Plastic 


Table 1101.4.6 


ASTM F714-2021a Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (DR- |Piping Table 701.2, 715.3.2 
PR) Based on Outside Diameter 

ASTM F794-2021 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Profile |Piping Table 701.2 
Gravity Sewer Pipe and Fittings Based on Controlled Inside 
Diameter 

ASTM F876-2020b Standard Specification for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Piping Table 604.1, 605.9.1 
Tubing 

ASTM F877-2020 Standard Specification for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Piping Table 604.1 
Hot- and Cold-Water Distribution Systems 

ASTM F891-2016 Standard Specification for Coextruded Poly (Vinyl Chloride) | Piping Table 701.2 
(PVC) Plastic Pipe with a Cellular Core 

ASTM F894-2019 Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Large Diameter  |Piping, Plastic Table 701.2 
Profile Wall Sewer and Drain Pipe 

ASTM F1055-2016a Standard Specification for Electrofusion Type Polyethylene Fittings Table 604.1, 
Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene and 705.5.1.2 


Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Pipe and Tubing 


342 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION EON 

ASTM F1216-2021 Standard Practice for Rehabilitation of Existing Pipelines and | Piping 715.3.1 
Conduits by the Inversion and Curing of a Resin-Impregnated 
Tube 

ASTM F1281-2017 Standard Specification for Crosslinked Polyethylene/ Alu- Piping Table 604.1 

(R2021)° 1 minum/Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) Pressure Pipe 

ASTM F1282-2017 Standard Specification for Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethyl- |Piping Table 604.1 
ene (PE-AL-PE) Composite Pressure Pipe 

ASTM F1336-2020 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Gas-  |Fittings Table 701.2 
keted Sewer Fittings 

ASTM F1412-2016 Standard Specification for Polyolefin Pipe and Fittings for Piping 811.2 
Corrosive Waste Drainage Systems 

ASTM F1488-2014 (R2019) | Standard Specification for Coextruded Composite Pipe Piping Table 701.2 

ASTM F1673-2010 Standard Specification for Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) Piping 811.2 

(R2021)°! Corrosive Waste Drainage Systems 

ASTM Е1760-2016 (R2020) | Standard Specification for Coextruded Poly(Vinyl Chloride) Piping Table 701.2 
(PVC) Non-Pressure Plastic Pipe Having Reprocessed 
Recycled Content 

ASTM F1807-2019b Standard Specification for Metal Insert Fittings Utilizing a Fittings Table 604.1 
Copper Crimp Ring, or Alternate Stainless Steel Clamps, for 
SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing and SDR9 
Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing 

ASTM F1866-2018 Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic | Fittings Table 701.2 
Schedule 40 Drainage and DWV Fabricated Fittings 

ASTM F1960-2021 Standard Specification for Cold Expansion Fittings with PEX Fittings Table 604.1 
Reinforcing Rings for Use with Cross-linked Polyethylene 
(PEX) and Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing 

ASTM F1970-2019 Standard Specification for Special Engineered Fittings, Piping Table 604.1, 606.1 
Appurtenances or Valves for Use in Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) 
or Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Systems 

ASTM F1973-2013 (R2018) | Standard Specification for Factory Assembled Anodeless Risers |Fuel Gas 1210.1.7.1(2) 
and Transition Fittings in Polyethylene (PE) and Polyamide 11 
(PA11) and Polyamide 12 (PA12) Fuel Gas Distribution Systems 

ASTM F1974-2009 (R2020) Standard Specification for Metal Insert Fittings for Polyethylene/ |Fittings Table 604.1, 605.7.1, 
Aluminum/Polyethylene and Crosslinked Polyethylene/ Alu- 605.10.1 
minum/Crosslinked Polyethylene Composite Pressure Pipe 

ASTM F2080-2019 Standard Specification for Cold-Expansion Fittings with Metal |Fittings Table 604.1 
Compression-Sleeves for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Pipe 
and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Pipe 

ASTM F2098-2018 Standard Specification for Stainless Steel Clamps for Securing |Fittings Table 604.1 
SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing and SDR9 
Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) to Metal Insert 
and Plastic Insert Fittings 

ASTM F2159-2021 Standard Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings Utilizing a Fittings Table 604.1 
Copper Crimp Ring, or Alternate Stainless Steel Clamps for 
SDR9 Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing and SDR9 
Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing 

ASTM F2389-2021 Standard Specification for Pressure-Rated Polypropylene (PP) |Piping Table 604.1, 
Piping Systems 605.11.1, 606.1 

ASTM F2434-2019 Standard Specification for Metal Insert Fittings Utilizing a Fittings Table 604.1, 
Copper Crimp Ring for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene 605.10.1 


(PEX) Tubing and SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene/Alu- 
minum/Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX-AL-PEX) Tubing 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


343 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPEICATION "SECTION 
ASTM F2509-2015 (R2019) | Standard Specification for Field-Assembled Anodeless Riser | Fuel Gas 1210.1.7.1(3) 
Kits for Use on Outside Diameter Controlled Polyethylene and 
Polyamide-11 (PA11) Gas Distribution Pipe and Tubing 
ASTM F2561-2020 Standard Practice for Rehabilitation of a Sewer Service Lateral |Piping 715.3.1 
and Its Connection to the Main Using a One Piece Main and 
Lateral Cured-in-Place Liner 
ASTM F2599-2020 Standard Practice for the Sectional Repair of Damaged Pipe by | Piping 715.3.1 
Means of an Inverted Cured-In-Place Liner 
ASTM F2618-2021 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly(Vinyl Chloride) Piping 811.2 
(CPVC) Pipe and Fittings for Chemical Waste Drainage Systems 
ASTM F2620-2020 Standard Practice for Heat Fusion Joining of Polyethylene Pipe |Joints 605.6.1.1, 605.6.1.3, 
and Fittings 705.5.1.1, 705.5.1.3 
ASTM F2735-2021 Standard Specification for Plastic Insert Fittings for SDR9 Fittings Table 604.1 
Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) and Polyethylene of Raised 
Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing 
ASTM F2769-2018 Standard Specification for Polyethylene of Raised Temperature |Piping, Fittings Table 604.1 
(PE-RT) Plastic Hot and Cold-Water Tubing and Distribution 
Systems 
ASTM F2831-2019 Standard Practice for Internal Non Structural Epoxy Barrier Miscellaneous 320.1 
Coating Material Used in Rehabilitation of Metallic Pressur- 
ized Piping Systems 
ASTM F2855-2019 Standard Specification for Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Piping Table 604.1, 605.3.1 
Chloride)/Aluminum/Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC- 
AL-CPVC) Composite Pressure Tubing 
ASTM F2945-2018 Standard Specification for Polyamide 11 Gas Pressure Pipe, Piping 1208.5.4, 
Tubing, and Fittings 1208.5.10.2 
ASTM F3226/F3226M- Standard Specification for Metallic Press-Connect Fittings for | Fittings Table 604.1 
2019 Piping and Tubing Systems 
ASTM F3240-2019*! Standard Practice for Installation of Seamless Molded Piping 715.3.1 
Hydrophilic Gaskets (SMHG) for Long-Term Watertightness 
of Cured-in-Place Rehabilitation of Main and Lateral Pipelines 
ASTM F3347-2021 Metal Press Insert Fittings with Factory Assembled Stainless Fittings Table 604.1 
Steel Press Sleeve for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) 
Tubing and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) 
Tubing 
ASTM F3348-2021a Plastic Press Insert Fittings with Factory Assembled Stainless Fittings Table 604.1 
Steel Press Sleeve for SDR9 Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) 
Tubing and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) 
Tubing 
AWS 
AWS A5.8M/AS.8-2019 Filler Metals for Brazing and Braze Welding Joints 605.1.1, 705.3.1, 
1321.3 
AWS А5.9/А5.9М-2017 Welding Consumables—Wire Electrodes, Strip Electrodes, Joints 605.13.2 
(ISO 14343:2009 MOD) Wires, and Rods for Arc Welding of Stainless and Heat Resisting 
Steels—Classification 
AWS B2.2/B2.2M-2016 Brazing Procedure and Performance Qualification Certification 1323.11 
AWWA 
AWWA C110-2012 Ductile-Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings Fittings Table 604.1 
AWWA C111-2017 Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron Pressure Pipe and Fittings | Joints 605.4.1, 605.4.2 
AWWA С151-2017 Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast Piping Table 604.1 
AWWA С153-2019 Ductile-Iron Compact Fittings Fittings Table 604.1 


344 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION END 
AWWA C210-2015 Liquid-Epoxy Coatings and Linings for Steel Water Pipe and — Miscellaneous 604.9 
Fittings 
AWW A C500-2019 Metal-Seated Gate Valves for Water Supply Service Valves 606.1 
AWW A C504-2015 Rubber-Seated Butterfly Valves Valves 606.1 
AWWA С507-2018 Ball Valves, 6 in. through 60 in. (150 mm through 1,500 mm) | Valves 606.1 
AWWA C510-2017 Double Check-Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
AWWA C511-2017 Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow Prevention Assembly Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
AWWA C530-2017 Pilot-Operated Control Valves Valves 608.2 
AWW A C606-2015 Grooved and Shouldered Joints Joints Table 604.1 
AWW A C900-2016 Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Pipe and Fabricated Fittings, |Piping Table 604.1 
4 in. through 12 in. (100 mm through 300 mm) 
AWW A C901-2020 Polyethylene (PE) Pressure Pipe and Tubing, % in. (19 mm) Piping Table 604.1 
through 3 in. (76 mm), for Water Service 
AWWA C904-2016 Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Pressure Tubing, # in. Piping Table 604.1 
through 3 in. (13 mm through 76 mm), for Water Service 
AWW A C907-2017 Injection-Molded Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure Fittings, | Fittings Table 604.1 
4 in. through 12 in. (100 mm through 300 mm), for Water, 
Wastewater, and Reclaimed Water Service 
CFR 
49 CFR 192.281 Plastic Pipe Plastic, Pipe 1208.5.6.2 
49 CFR 192.283 Plastic Pipe: Qualifying Joining Procedures Plastic, Pipe 1208.5.6.2 
CGA 
CGA G-4.1-2018 Cleaning of Equipment for Oxygen Service Miscellaneous 1318.2, 1321.8.7 
CGA M-1-2018 Medical Gas Supply Systems at Health Care Facilities Miscellaneous 1324.5.7.3 
CGA V-5-2019 Diameter Index Safety System (Noninterchangeable Low Pres- | Connections 1315.5 
sure Connections for Medical Gas Applications) 
CISPI 


CISPI 301-2021 


Hubless Cast Iron Soil Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm 
Drain, Waste, and Vent Piping Applications 


Piping, Ferrous 


301.2.4, Table 701.2, 
Table 707.2 


CISPI 310-2020 Couplings for Use in Connection with Hubless Cast Iron Soil  |Joints 301.2.4, 705.2.2 
Pipe and Fittings for Sanitary and Storm Drain, Waste, and 
Vent Piping Applications 
CSA 
ASME A112.19.2- Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 
2018/CSA B45.1-2018 410.1, 411.1, 412.1, 
415.1, 420.1 
ASME A112.19.1- Enameled Cast Iron and Enameled Steel Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 
2018/CSA B45.2-2018 415.1, 420.1 
ASME A112.19.3- Stainless Steel Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 
2017/CSA B45.4-2017 410.1, 411.1, 415.1, 
420.1 
CSA B45.5-2017/IAPMO [Plastic Plumbing Fixtures (with Errata dated August 2017) Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 
Z124-2017 411.1, 412.1, 420.1 
CSA В45.8-2018ЛАРМО |Terrazzo, Concrete, Composite Stone, and Natural Stone Fixtures 407.1, 420.1 
Z403-2018 Plumbing Fixtures 
ASME A112.3.4-2018/CSA | Macerating Toilet Systems and Waste-Pumping Systems for Fixtures 710.13 
B45.9-2018 Plumbing Fixtures 
ASME A112.19.7- Hydromassage Bathtub Systems Fixtures 409.1, 409.6.1 


2020/CSA B45.10-2020 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


345 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
REFERENCED 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION SECTION 
CSA В45.11-2017ЛАРМО Glass Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1 
Z401-2017 (R2021) 
CSA В45.12-2013ЛАРМО  |Aluminum and Copper Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 
7402-2013 (R2018) 420.1 
ASME A112.19.5- Flush Valves and Spuds for Water Closets, Urinals, and Tanks |Fixtures 413.3 
2017/CSA B45.15-2017 
ASME A112.4.2-2021/CSA |Personal Hygiene Devices for Water Closets Fixtures 411.4 
B45.16-2021 
CSA B64.1.1-2021 Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers (AVB) Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
CSA B64.1.2-2021 Pressure Vacuum Breakers (PVB) Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
CSA B64.2.1.1-2021 Hose Connection Dual Check Vacuum Breakers (HCDVB) Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
CSA B64.4-2021 Reduced Pressure Principle (RP) Backflow Preventers Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
CSA B64.4.1-2021 Reduced Pressure Principle Backflow Preventers for Fire Pro- |Backflow Protection | Table 603.2 
tection Systems (RPF) 
CSA B64.5-2021 Double Check Valve (DCVA) Backflow Preventers Backflow Protection |Table 603.2 
CSA B64.5.1-2021 Double Check Valve Backflow Preventers for Fire Protection | Backflow Protection | Table 603.2 


Systems (DCVAF) 


CSA B79-2008 (R2018) Commercial and Residential Drains and Cleanouts Fixtures 418.1, Table 707.2 

ASME A112.18.1- Plumbing Supply Fittings Fittings 408.4, 417.1, 417.2, 

2018/CSA B125.1-2018 417.3, 417.4, 417.6, 
603.5.20 

ASME A112.18.2- Plumbing Waste Fittings Fittings 404.1, 408.5 

2020/CSA B125.2-2020 

CSA B125.3-2018 Plumbing Fittings Fittings 409.4(1), 410.3(1) 

CSA B125.5-2011/IAPMO  |Flexible Water Connectors with Excess Flow Shut-off Device | Miscellaneous 604.5 

2600-2011 (R2016) 

ASME A112.18.6- Flexible Water Connectors Piping 604.5, 604.13 


2017/CSA B125.6-2017 
(R2021) 


ASSE 1002-2020/ASME 
A112.1002-2020/CSA 
B125.12-2020 


Anti-Siphon Fill Valves for Water Closet Tanks 


Backflow Protection 


413.3, Table 603.2 


ASME A112.4.14- Manually Operated Valves for Use in Plumbing Systems Valves 606.1 
2017/CSA B125.14-2017 
ASSE 1016-2017/ASME Automatic Compensating Valves for Individual Showers and — | Valves 408.4, 408.4.2(1) 


A112.1016-2017/CSA 
B125.16-2017 


Tub/Shower Combinations 


ASSE 1037-2020/ASME 
A112.1037-2020/CSA 
B125.37-2020 


Pressurized Flushing Devices for Plumbing Fixtures 


Backflow Protection 


413.2 


ASSE 1070-2020/ASME Water Temperature Limiting Devices Valves 407.3(1), 409.4(1), 
A112.1070-2020/CSA 410.3(1), 417.71), 
B125.70-2020 417.8 
CSA B137.1-2020 Polyethylene (PE) Pipe, Tubing, and Fittings for Cold-Water — |Piping Table 604.1 
Pressure Services 
CSA B137.5-2020 Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing Systems for Pressure |Piping Table 604.1 
Applications 
CSA B137.6-2020 Chlorinated Polyvinylchloride (CPVC) Pipe, Tubing, and Fit- | Piping, Fittings Table 604.1 
tings for Hot- and Cold-Water Distribution Systems (with 
Update No. 1) 
CSA B137.9-2020 Polyethylene/Aluminum/Polyethylene (PE-AL-PE) Composite | Piping Table 604.1 


Pressure-Pipe Systems 


346 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION EN 

CSA B137.10-2020 Crosslinked Polyethylene/Aluminum/Crosslinked Polyethylene |Piping Table 604.1 

(PEX-AL-PEX) Composite Pressure-Pipe Systems 
CSA B137.11-2020 Polypropylene (PP-R & PP-RCT) Pipe and Fittings for Pres- — |Piping Table 604.1, 

sure Applications 605.11.1 
CSA B137.18-2020 Polyethylene of Raised Temperature Resistance (PE-RT) Piping, Fittings Table 604.1 

Tubing Systems for Pressure Applications 
CSA B181.3-2021 Polyolefin and Polyvinylidene Fluoride (PVDF) Laboratory Piping 811.2 

Drainage Systems 
CSA B242-2005 (R2021)  |Groove- and Shoulder-Type Mechanical Pipe Couplings Fittings Table 604.1 
CSA B481-2012 (R2017) Grease Interceptors Fixtures Table 1009.1, 1014.1 
CSA/ANSI LC 1-2019/CSA |Fuel Gas Piping Systems Using Corrugated Stainless Steel Fuel Gas 1208.5.3.5, 
6.26-2019 Tubing 1210.4.1(4), 1211.3 
ANSI LC 4-2022/CSA 6.32- | Press-Connect Metallic Fittings and Valves for Use in Fuel Gas | Fuel Gas 1208.4(2), 1208.5.9.1, 


2022 


Distribution Systems 


1208.5.9.2, 
1208.5.9.3, Table 
1208.13, 1210.4.1(3) 


CSA/ANSI Z21.10.1- 
2019/CSA 4.1-2019 


Gas Water Heaters, Volume I, Storage Water Heaters with Input 
Ratings of 75,000 Btu Per Hour or Less 


Fuel Gas, Appliances 


Table 501.1(1) 


CSA/ANSI Z21.10.3- 
2019/CSA 4.3-2019 


Gas-Fired Water Heaters, Volume III, Storage Water Heaters 
with Input Ratings Above 75,000 Btu Per Hour, Circulating 
and Instantaneous 


Fuel Gas, Appliances 


Table 501.1(1) 


CSA/ANSI Z21.15- 
2021/CSA 9.1-2021 


Manually Operated Gas Valves for Appliances, Appliance 
Connector Valves, and Hose End Valves 


Fuel Gas 


Table 1208.13 


CSA/ANSI Z21.18- Gas Appliance Pressure Regulators Gas Pressure 507.20 
2019/CSA 6.3-2019 Regulators 

ANSI Z21.22-2015/CSA Relief Valves for Hot Water Supply Systems Valves 607.6, 608.7 
4.4-2015 (R2020) 

ANSI Z21.24-2015/CSA Connectors for Gas Appliances Fuel Gas 1212.1(3), 1212.2 
6.10-2015 (R2020) 

ANSI Z21.41-2014/CSA Quick Disconnect Devices for Use with Gas Fuel Appliances  |Fuel Gas 1212.7 
6.9-2014 (R2019) 

CSA/ANSI Z21.54- Gas Hose Connectors for Portable Outdoor Gas-Fired Appliances | Fuel Gas 1212.32 
2019/CSA 8.4-2019 

ANSI Z21.69-2015/CSA Connectors for Moveable Gas Appliances Fuel Gas 1212.12 
6.16-2015 (R2020) 

ANSI Z21.75-2016/CSA Connectors for Outdoor Gas Appliances and Manufactured Fuel Gas 1212.1(4) 
6.27-2016 Homes 

CSA/ANSI Z21.80- Line Pressure Regulators Fuel Gas 1208.7.1, 1208.15 
2019/CSA 6.22-2019 

CSA/ANSI Z21.90- Gas Convenience Outlets and Optional Enclosures Fuel Gas 1212.8 
2019/CSA 6.24-2019 

ANSI Z21.93-2017/CSA Excess Flow Valves for Natural Gas and Propane Gas with Fuel Gas 1209.1 
6.30-2017 Pressures up to 5 psig 

DOE 

DOE-STD-3020-2015 HEPA Filters Used by DOE Contractors Miscellaneous 1312.4(3) 
IAPMO 

ANSI/CAN/ASSE/IAPMO  |Chemical Dispensers with Integral Backflow Protection Backflow Protection |Table 603.2, 
1055-2020 603.5.22 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Cross-Connection Control Professional Qualifications Standard | Certification 603.2, 603.4.2 
5000-2015 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6010- | Medical Gas Systems Installers Certification 1323.10 


2021 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


347 


| 
<== 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION учин 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020- | Medical Gas Systems Inspectors Miscellaneous 1324.5.4.7, 

2021 1324.5.6.2, 1324.5.6.5 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030- |Medical Gas Systems Verifiers Miscellaneous 1324.5.4.7, 

2021 1324.5.6.2, 
1324.5.6.5, 
1324.5.7.2 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6035- | Bulk Medical Gas/Cryogenic Fluid Central Supply Systems Miscellaneous 1324.5.7.3 

2021 Verifiers 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler System Installers & ^ Miscellaneous 612.1 

7000-2020 Inspectors for One- and Two-Family Dwellings 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Environment of Care, Infection Control and Construction Risk |Professional 1303.9 

12010-2021 Assessment Professional Qualification Standard Qualifications 

IAPMO IGC 78-2019 Drain, Waste and Vent (DWV) Internal Cleanout Fittings DWV Components |Table 707.2 

IAPMO IGC 109-2019 Water Distribution Manifolds Valves 606.5.1 

IAPMO IGC 127-2018 Combined Hand-Washing Systems Fixtures 407.1, 420.1 

IAPMO IGC 154-2019 Shower and Tub/Shower Enclosures, Bathtubs with Glass Pres- | Fixtures 408.1 

sure-Sealed Doors, and Shower/Steam Panels 

IAPMO IGC 167-2011a?  |Solid Waste Containment Interceptors Interceptors Table 1009.1 

(R2021) 

IAPMO IGC 183-2016 Oil/Water Separators and Coalescing Plate Separators DWV Components |Table 1009.1, 1017.2 


IAPMO IGC 196-2018 


Condensate Traps and Overflow Switches for Air-Conditioning 
Systems 


Condensate Traps 


814.4 


IAPMO IGC 224-2018 ABS, PVC and Cast Iron DWV Test Fitting with Integral DWV Components |Table 707.2 
Cleanout 

IAPMO IGC 305-2019 ABS and PVC Horizontal Backwater Valves with Lifting Valves 710.6 
Devices 

IAPMO IGC 322-2018 Alkaline Water — Drinking Water Treatment Units Miscellaneous 611.1.1 

IAPMO IGC 324-2019 Alternate Water Source Systems for Multi-Family, Residential, | Water Quality 1501.7, 1506.8, 
and Commercial Use 1506.10.2, 1603.4 

IAPMO IGC 325-2016 Oil/Water Separators Performance Interceptors Table 1009.1 

IAPMO PS 53-2020 Grooved Mechanical Pipe Couplings and Grooved Fittings Fittings Table 604.1 

IAPMO PS 65-2019a Airgap Units for Water Conditioning Equipment Installation — | Backflow Protection |611.2 

IAPMO PS 66-2015 Dielectric Fittings Fittings 605.15, 605.16.1, 

605.16.3 

IAPMO PS 72-2019 Valves with Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers Valves 603.5.6(5) 

IAPMO PS 76-2021 Trap Primers for Fill Valves and Flushometer Valves DWV Components [1007.2 

IAPMO PS 80-2019 Clarifiers Interceptors Table 1009.1 

IAPMO PS 90-2014 Elastomeric Test Caps, Cleanout Caps, and Combination Test |DWV Components |Table 707.2 
Caps/Shielded Couplings 

IAPMO PS 104-2019 Pressure Relief Connection for Dispensing Equipment Valves 603.5.22(1) 

IAPMO PS 106-2015"! Tileable Shower Receptors and Shower Kits Fixtures 408.2 

IAPMO PS 117-2021 Press Connections Fittings Table 604.1 

CSA B45.5-2017/IAPMO  |Plastic Plumbing Fixtures (with Errata dated August 2017) Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 

7124-2017 411.1, 412.1, 420.1 

IAPMO/ANSI Z124.5- Plastic Toilet Seats Appurtenance 411.3 

2013*! (R2018) 

CSA В45.11-2017ЛАРМО  |Glass Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1 

Z401-2017 (R2021) 

CSA В45.12-2013ЛАРМО  |Aluminum and Copper Plumbing Fixtures Fixtures 407.1, 408.1, 409.1, 

Z402-2013 (R2018) 420.1 

CSA B45.8-2018/IAPMO  |Terrazzo, Concrete, Composite Stone, and Natural Stone Fixtures 407.1, 420.1 


7403-2018 


Plumbing Fixtures 


348 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARD TITLE APPLICATION ЕЕЕ" 
IAPMO/ANSI Z601-2018 |ЅсаІе Reduction Devices Water Conditioning, |611.1.2 


Water Treatment 


ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1001- |Prefabricated Gravity Grease Interceptors Fixtures Table 1009.1, 1014.1, 
2021 1014.3.4 
IAPMO/ANSI Z1002-2020 |Rainwater Harvesting Tanks Rainwater Tanks 1603.5 
IAPMO/ANSI Z1033-2015 |Flexible PVC Hoses and Tubing for Pools, Hot Tubs, Spas, and | Tubing 409.6.2 
(R2020) Jetted Bathtubs 
IAPMO/ANSI Z1088-2019*! |Pre-Pressurized Water Expansion Tanks Miscellaneous 608.3 
IAPMO/ANSI Z1157- Ball Valves Valves 606.1 
2014e1 (R2019) 
ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1349- |Devices for Detection, Monitoring or Control of Plumbing Leak Detection 606.9 
2021 Systems 
CSA B125.5-2011/IAPMO  |Flexible Water Connectors with Excess Flow Shut-off Device | Miscellaneous 604.5 
7600-2011 (R2016) 
ICC 
ICC A117.1-2017 Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities Miscellaneous 403.2 
ISEA 
ISEA Z358.1-2014 Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equipment Miscellaneous 416.1, 416.2 
MSS 
MSS SP-58-2018 Pipe Hangers and Supports — Materials, Design, Manufacture, | Miscellaneous 1210.3.5, 1323.4.1 
Selection, Application, and Installation 
MSS SP-67-2017 Butterfly Valves Valves 606.1 
MSS SP-70-2011 Gray Iron Gate Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends Valves 606.1 
MSS SP-71-2018 Gray Iron Swing Check Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends — | Valves 606.1 
MSS SP-72-2010a Ball Valves with Flanged or Butt-Welding Ends for General Valves 606.1 
Service 
MSS SP-78-2011 Gray Iron Plug Valves, Flanged and Threaded Ends Valves 606.1 
MSS SP-80-2019 Bronze Gate, Globe, Angle, and Check Valves Valves 606.1 
MSS SP-110-2010 Ball Valves Threaded, Socket-Welding, Solder Joint, Grooved | Valves 606.1 
and Flared Ends 
MSS SP-122-2017 Plastic Industrial Ball Valves Valves 606.1 
NFPA 
NFPA 13D-2022 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- апа | Miscellaneous 612.1, 612.5.3.1 
Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes 
NFPA 30A-2024 Code for Motor Fuel Dispensing Facilities and Repair Garages | Miscellaneous 507.142 
NFPA 31-2020 Standard for the Installation of Oil-Burning Equipment Fuel Gas, Appliances 505.3, 1201.1 
NFPA 37-2024 Standard for the Installation and Use of Stationary Combustion | Fuel Oil Piping 1201.1 
Engines and Gas Turbines Systems 
NFPA 51-2025 Standard for the Design and Installation of Oxygen-Fuel Gas — |Fuel Gas 507.9 
Systems for Welding, Cutting, and Allied Processes 
NFPA 54/ANSI Z223.1-2024 | National Fuel Gas Code Fuel Gas Chapter 5, Chapter 12 
NFPA 58-2024 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Code Fuel Gas 1208.4(8), 
1208.5.6.3, 
1208.5.10.4, 1212.11 
NFPA 70-2023 National Electrical Code Miscellaneous 508.2.2, 1210.12.5.2, 


*See California Electrical Code for amendments 


1211.24, 1211.7, 
1317.1(11), 1323.3.1, 
1326.4(3) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


349 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


through August 5, 2021) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
REFERENCED 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION SECTION 
| NFPA 88A-2023 Parking Structures Miscellaneous 507.14.1 
NFPA 99-2024 Health Care Facilities Code Miscellaneous 1301.3, 1309.13(2), 
1317.109), 1324.5.9.4, 
1326.3, 1326.4(3), 
1326.8(4), 1327.1 
NFPA 211-2024 Standard for Chimneys, Fireplaces, Vents, and Solid Fuel- Fuel Gas, 509.5.2, 509.5.3, 
Burning Appliances Appliances 509.5.6.1, 509.5.6.3 
NFPA 409-2022 Standard on Aircraft Hangars Miscellaneous 507.15 
NFPA 780-2023 Standard for the Installation of Lightning Protection Systems — |Fuel Gas 1211.5 
NFPA 1192-2021 Standard on Recreational Vehicles Fuel Gas 1202.3(18) 
NSF 
NSF/ANSI 3-2021 Commercial Warewashing Equipment Appliances 414.1 
NSF/ANSI 14-2020 Plastics Piping System Components and Related Materials Miscellaneous 301.2.3, 604.1, 
605.9.1, 606.1 
NSF/ANSI 42-2021 Drinking Water Treatment Units — Aesthetic Effects Appliances Table 611.1 
NSF/ANSI 44-2018 Residential Cation Exchange Water Softeners Appliances Table 611.1 
NSF/ANSI 53-2020 Drinking Water Treatment Units-Health Effects Appliances Table 611.1 
NSF/ANSI 55-2020 Ultraviolet Microbiological Water Treatment Systems Appliances Table 611.1 
NSF/ANSI 58-2020 Reverse Osmosis Drinking Water Treatment Systems Appliances Table 611.1, 611.2 
NSF/ANSI/CAN 61-2021 Drinking Water System Components — Health Effects Miscellaneous 415.1, 417.1, 604.1, 
604.9, 606.1, 607.3, 
608.2, 609.8.2, Table 
611.1 
NSF/ANSI 62-2021 Drinking Water Distillation Systems Appliances Table 611.1 
NSF/ANSI 184-2019 Residential Dishwashers Appliances 414.1 
NSF/ANSI 350-2020 Onsite Residential and Commercial Water Reuse Treatment Miscellaneous 1501.7, 1506.8, 
Systems 1506.10.2 
Note: NSF/ANSI 350, amended sections follow: 
5.6 Electrical Components. Electrical components...The 
California Electrical Code shall be followed for all electrical 
components, system installation, and system operation. 
NSF/ANSI 359-2018 Valves for Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Water Distribution | Valves 606.1 
Tubing Systems 
PDI 
PDI G-101-2017 Testing and Rating Procedure for Hydro Mechanical Grease DWV Components |Table 1009.1, 1014.1 
Interceptors with Appendix of Installation and Maintenance 
PDI G-102-2009 Testing and Certification for Grease Interceptors with FOG Certification Table 1009.1, 1014.1 
Sensing and Alarm Devices 
PDI-WH 201-2017 Water Hammer Arresters Water Supply 609.11 
Components 
UL 
UL 103-2010 Factory-Built Chimneys for Residential Type and Building Fuel Gas, Appliances |509.5.1, 509.5.1.1 
Heating Appliances (with revisions through September 24, 
2021) 
UL 174-2004 Household Electric Storage Tank Water Heaters (with revisions | Appliances Table 501.1(1) 
through December 16, 2021) 
UL 263-2011 Fire Tests of Building Construction and Materials (with revisions Miscellaneous 1404.3, 1405.3 


350 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.1 (continued) 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 
STANDARD NUMBER STANDARDTITLE APPLICATION SECTION 
UL 378-2006 Draft Equipment (with revisions through September 17, 2013) Fuel Gas, Appliances |509.3.3, 509.13, 
509.14.1 

UL 399-2017 Drinking Water Coolers (with revisions through July 31, 2020) |Fixtures 415.1 

UL 430-2015 Waste Disposers (with revisions through September 14, 2021) Appliances 419.1 

UL 441-2016 Gas Vents (with revisions through August 28, 2019) Fuel Gas, Vents 509.1 

UL 467-2013 Grounding and Bonding Equipment (with revisions through Miscellaneous 1211.2.5 
June 7, 2017) 

UL 499-2014 Electric Heating Appliances (with revisions through October | Appliances Table 501.1(1) 
22, 2021) 

UL 641-2010 Type L Low-Temperature Venting Systems (with revisions Fuel Gas 509.1 
through April 23, 2018) 

UL 723-2018 Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building Materials | Miscellaneous 701.2(2), 903.1(2), 

1101.4 

UL 732-2018 Oil-Fired Storage Tank Water Heaters (with revisions through | Fuel Gas, Appliances | Table 501.1(1) 
August 9, 2018) 

UL 749-2018 Household Dishwashers Appliances 414.1 

UL 778-2016 Motor-Operated Water Pumps (with revisions through June Appliances 1101.14 
29, 2021) 

UL 921-2020 Commercial Dishwashers Appliances 414.1 

UL 959-2010 Medium Heat Appliance Factory-Built Chimneys (with revisions | Fuel Gas, Appliances |509.5.1 
through August 28, 2019) 

UL 1453-2016 Electric Booster and Commercial Storage Tank Water Heaters | Appliances Table 501.1(1) 
(with revisions through May 18, 2018) 

UL 1479-2015 Fire Tests of Penetration Firestops (with revisions through May Miscellaneous 1404.3, 1405.3 
18, 2021) 

UL 1738-2010 Venting Systems for Gas-Burning Appliances, Categories II, — |Fuel Gas, Appliances |509.4.1, 509.4.2, 
Ш, and IV (with revisions through August 26, 2021) 509.4.3 

UL 1777-2015 Chimney Liners (with revisions through April 11, 2019) Chimney Liners 509.5.3(2) 

UL 2523-2009 Solid Fuel-Fired Hydronic Heating Appliances, Water Heaters, |Fuel Gas, Appliances | Table 501.1(1) 
and Boilers (with revisions through March 16, 2018) 

UL 2561-2016 1400 Degree Fahrenheit Factory-Built Chimneys (with revisions | Fuel Gas, Appli- 509.5.1 
through April 19, 2018) ances 

WSC 

ASSE 1099-2021/WSC PST | Pressurized Water Storage Tanks Valves 607.2 

2000-2021 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 351 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


1701.2 Standards, Publications, Practices, and cations, practices, and guides shall be as specified in Section 
Guides. The standards, publications, practices, and guides 301.2.2. The promulgating agency acronyms are found at the 
listed in Table 1701.2 are not referenced in other sections of end of the tables. 

this code. The application of the referenced standards, publi- 


TABLE 1701.2 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 

AHAM 
АНАМ FWD-1-2016 Food Waste Disposers Appliances 
ARCSA 
ARCSA/ASPE 78-2015 Stormwater Harvesting System Design for Direct End-Use Applications Miscellaneous 
ASABE 
ASABE/ICC 802-2014 Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard Irrigation 
ASCE 
ASCE 25-2016 Earthquake-Actuated Automatic Gas Shutoff Devices Fuel Gas 
ASHRAE 

| ASHRAE/IES 90.1-2019 Energy Standard for Buildings Except Low-Rise Residential Buildings Miscellaneous 
ASHRAE/IES 90.2-2018 Energy-Efficient Design of Low-Rise Residential Buildings Miscellaneous 
ASHRAE 188-2021 Legionellosis: Risk Management for Building Water Systems Risk Management 
ASHRAE Guideline 12- Managing the Risk of Legionellosis Associated with Building Water Systems Risk Management 
2020 
ASME 
ASME A13.1-2020 Scheme for the Identification of Piping Systems Piping 
ASME A112.4.3-1999 Plastic Fittings for Connecting Water Closets to the Sanitary Drainage System Fittings 
(R2019) 
ASME A112.19.10-2017 Retrofit Dual Flush Devices for Water Closets Fixtures 
ASME A112.21.3M-1985  |Hydrants for Utility and Maintenance Use Valves 
(R2017) 
ASME B1.20.3-1976 Dryseal Pipe Threads (Inch) Joints 
(R2018) 
ASME B16.39-2019 Malleable Iron Threaded Pipe Unions: Classes 150, 250 and 300 Fittings 


ASME B16.40-2019 


Manually Operated Thermoplastic Gas Shutoffs and Valves in Gas Distribution Sys- Valves 
tems 


ASME B31.1-2020 Power Piping Piping 

ASME B36.19M-2018 Stainless Steel Pipe Piping, Ferrous 
ASME BPVC Section IV- |Rules for Construction of Heating Boilers Miscellaneous 
2021 

ASPE 

ARCSA/ASPE 78-2015 Stormwater Harvesting System Design for Direct End-Use Applications Miscellaneous 
WQA/ASPE/ANSI S-803-  |Sustainable Drinking Water Treatment Systems Miscellaneous 
2017 

ASSE 

ASSE 1017-2009 Temperature Actuated Mixing Valves for Hot Water Distribution Systems Valves 

ASSE 1066-1997 Individual Pressure Balancing In-Line Valves for Individual Fixture Fittings Valves 


ASSE 1082-2018 


Water Heaters with Integral Temperature Control Devices for Hot Water Distribution | Appliances 
Systems 


ASSE 1086-2020 Reverse Osmosis Water Efficiency — Drinking Water Appliances 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5110- | Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers Professional 
2015 Qualifications 


352 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5120- | Cross-Connection Control Surveyors Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5130- | Backflow Prevention Assembly Repairers Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5140- | Fire Protection System Cross-Connection Control Tester Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5150- | Backflow Prevention Program Administrators Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series |Professional Qualifications Standard for Medical Gas Systems Personnel Professional 
6000-2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6015- |Bulk Medical Gas/Cryogenic Fluid Central Supply Systems Installers Professional 
2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6040- | Medical Gas Systems Maintenance Personnel Professional 
2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 7010- Installers of Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler Systems for One- and Two- Professional 
2020 Family Dwellings Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 7020- | Inspectors of Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler Systems for One- and Two- Professional 
2020 Family Dwellings Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series |Professional Qualifications Standard for Water Management and Infection Control Professional 
12000-2021 Risk Assessment for Building Systems Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Environment of Care, Infection Control and Construction Risk Assessment Profes- Professional 
12020-2021 sional Qualification Standard for Construction and Maintenance Employers Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Employers and Des- | Professional 
12060-2021 ignated Representatives Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Plumbers Professional 
12061-2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Pipefitters and Professional 
12062-2021 HVAC Technicians Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Sprinkler Fitters Professional 
12063-2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Professional Qualifications Standard for Legionella Water Safety and Management — |Professional 
12080-2021 Specialist Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Service Plumber and Residential Mechanical Service Technician Professional Quali- | Professional 
13000-2015 (R2020) fications Standard Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Professional Qualifications Standard for the Service Plumber Professional 
13010-2015 (R2020) Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Professional Qualifications Standard for Inspectors and Plans Examiners Professional 
16000-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Plumbing Inspector Professional 
16010-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Plumbing Plan Examiner Professional 
16040-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/ARCSA/IAPMO/ Rainwater Catchment Systems Personnel Professional 
ANSI Series 21000-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Rainwater Catchment Systems Installers Professional 
21110-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Rainwater Catchment Systems Designers Professional 
21120-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Inspectors of Rainwater and Stormwater Catchment Systems Professional 
21130-2017 Qualifications 
ASTM 


ASTM A48/A48M-2003 
(R2021) 


Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings 


Piping, Ferrous 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


353 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER 


DOCUMENT TITLE 


APPLICATION 


ASTM A126-2004 (R2019) 


Standard Specification for Gray Iron Castings for Valves, Flanges, and Pipe Fittings 


Piping, Ferrous 


ASTM A377-2018 


Standard Index of Specifications for Ductile Iron Pressure Pipe 


Piping, Ferrous 


ASTM A479/A479M-2020 


Standard Specification for Stainless Steel Bars and Shapes for Use in Boilers and 
Other Pressure Vessels 


Piping, Ferrous 


ASTM A536-1984 
(R2019)°! 


Standard Specification for Ductile Iron Castings 


Piping, Ferrous 


ASTM A733-2016 


Standard Specification for Welded and Seamless Carbon Steel and Austenitic Stain- 
less Steel Pipe Nipples 


Piping, Ferrous 


ASTM A1045-2010 
(R2021) 


Standard Specification for Flexible Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Gaskets used in 
Connection of Vitreous China Plumbing Fixtures to Sanitary Drainage Systems 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM B29-2019 


Standard Specification for Refined Lead 


Joints 


ASTM 8370-2012 (R2019) 


Standard Specification for Copper Sheet and Strip for Building Construction 


Miscellaneous 


ASTM B687-1999 (R2016) 


Standard Specification for Brass, Copper, and Chromium-Plated Pipe Nipples 


Piping, Copper Alloy 


ASTM C14-2020 


Standard Specification for Nonreinforced Concrete Sewer, Storm Drain, and Culvert 
Pipe 


Piping, Non-Metallic 


ASTM C412-2019 


Standard Specification for Concrete Drain Tile 


Piping, Non-Metallic 


ASTM C443-2021 


Standard Specification for Joints for Concrete Pipe and Manholes, Using Rubber Gaskets 


Joints 


ASTM C444-2021 


Standard Specification for Perforated Concrete Pipe 


Piping, Non-Metallic 


ASTM C478/CA78M-2020 Standard Specification for Circular Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Sections Miscellaneous 
ASTM C1227-2020 Standard Specification for Precast Concrete Septic Tanks DWV Components 
ASTM C1440-2021 Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Elastomeric (TPE) Gasket Materials for Joints 


Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV), Sewer, Sanitary and Storm Plumbing Systems 


ASTM D1784-2020 


Standard Classification System and Basis for Specifications for Rigid Poly (Vinyl 
Chloride) (PVC) Compounds and Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Com- 
pounds 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM D2321-2020 


Standard Practice for Underground Installation of Thermoplastic Pipe for Sewers and 
Other Gravity-Flow Applications 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM D2517-2018 


Standard Specification for Reinforced Epoxy Resin Gas Pressure Pipe and Fittings 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM D2657-2007 (R2015) 


Standard Practice for Heat Fusion Joining of Polyolefin Pipe and Fittings 


Joints 


ASTM D2774-2021a 


Standard Practice for Underground Installation of Thermoplastic Pressure Piping 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM D2855-2020 Standard Practice for the Two-Step (Primer and Solvent Cement) Method of Joining — Joints 
Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) or Chlorinated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) Pipe and 
Piping Components with Tapered Sockets 

ASTM D3122-2015 Standard Specification for Solvent Cement for Styrene-Rubber (SR) Plastic Pipe and | Joints 
Fittings 

ASTM D3311-2017 (R2021) | Standard Specification for Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) Plastic Fittings Patterns Fittings 

ASTM F402-2018 Standard Practice for Safe Handling of Solvent Cements, Primers, and Cleaners Used |Joints 


for Joining Thermoplastic Pipe and Fittings 


ASTM F480-2014 


Standard Specification for Thermoplastic Well Casing Pipe and Couplings Made in 
Standard Dimension Ratios (SDR), SCH 40 and SCH 80 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM F810-2012 (R2018) 


Standard Specification for Smoothwall Polyethylene (PE) Pipe for Use in Drainage 
and Waste Disposal Absorption Fields 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM F949-2020 


Standard Specification for Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Corrugated Sewer Pipe with a 
Smooth Interior and Fittings 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM F1476-2007 (R2019) 


Standard Specification for Performance of Gasketed Mechanical Couplings for Use in 
Piping Applications 


Joints 


ASTM F1499-2017 


Standard Specification for Coextruded Composite Drain, Waste, and Vent Pipe 
(DWV) 


Piping, Plastic 


354 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER 


DOCUMENT TITLE 


APPLICATION 


ASTM F1743-2017 


Standard Practice for Rehabilitation of Existing Pipelines and Conduits by Pulled-in- 
Place Installation of Cured-in-Place Thermosetting Resin Pipe (CIPP) 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM F1924-2019 Standard Specification for Plastic Mechanical Fittings for Use on Outside Diameter — Fittings 
Controlled Polyethylene Gas Distribution Pipe and Tubing 
ASTM F1948-2020 Standard Specification for Metallic Mechanical Fittings for Use on Outside Diameter |Fittings 


Controlled Thermoplastic Gas Distribution Pipe and Tubing 


ASTM F2165-2019 


Standard Specification for Flexible Pre-Insulated Piping 


Piping, Plastic 


ASTM F2206-2019 


Standard Specification for Fabricated Fittings of Butt-Fused Polyethylene (PE) 


DWV Components 


ASTM F2306/F2306M- Standard Specification for 12 to 60 in. [300 to 1500 mm] Annular Corrugated Profile- |Piping, Plastic 
2021 Wall Polyethylene (PE) Pipe and Fittings for Gravity-Flow Storm Sewer and Subsurface 

Drainage Applications 
AWS 


AWS B2.4-2012 


Welding Procedure and Performance Qualification for Thermoplastics 


Joints, Certification 


AWWA 

AWWA C203-2020 Coal-Tar Protective Coatings and Linings for Steel Water Pipe Miscellaneous 

AWWA C213-2015 Fusion-Bonded Epoxy Coatings and Linings for Steel Water Pipe and Fittings Miscellaneous 

AWWA C215-2016 Extruded Polyolefin Coatings for Steel Water Pipe Miscellaneous 

CFR 

10 CFR 430 Energy Conservation Program for Consumer Products Energy Conservation 

10 CFR 431.106 Uniform Test Method for The Measurement of Energy Efficiency of Commercial Water Heating 
Water Heating Equipment Equipment 

49 CFR 192 Transportation of Natural and Other Gas by Pipeline: Minimum Federal Standards Miscellaneous 

CGA 

CGA C-9-2019 Standard Color Marking of Compressed Gas Containers for Medical Use Miscellaneous 

CGA S-1.3-2020 Pressure Relief Device Standards-Part 3-Stationary Storage Containers for Com- Fuel Gas 
pressed Gases 

CGA V-1-2021 Compressed Gas Cylinder Valve Outlet and Inlet Connections Valves 

CSA 

CSA A257 Series-2019 Standards for Concrete Pipe and Manhole Sections Piping 

CSA B55.2-2020 Drain Water Heat Recovery Units Miscellaneous 


CSA B64.7-2021 


Laboratory Faucet Vacuum Breakers (LFVB) 


Backflow Protection 


CSA B66-2021 Design, Material, and Manufacturing Requirements for Prefabricated Septic Tanks DWV Components 
and Sewage Holding Tanks 

CSA B128.1-2006/B128.2- |Design and Installation of Non-Potable Water Systems/Maintenance and Field Test- | Miscellaneous 

2006 (R2016) ing of Non-Potable Water Systems 

CAN/CSA B356-2010 Water Pressure Reducing Valves for Domestic Water Supply Systems Valves 

(R2020) 

CAN/CSA G401-2014 Corrugated Steel Pipe Products Piping, Ferrous 

(R2019) 

ANSI Z21.12b-1994 Draft Hoods Fuel Gas, Appliances 

(R2020) 


CSA Z21.13-2017 


Gas-Fired Low-Pressure Steam and Hot Water Boilers (same as CSA 4.9) 


Fuel Gas, Appliances 


ANSI Z21.81a-2007/ CSA 
6.25a-2007 (R2020) 


Cylinder Connection Devices 


Fuel Gas 


CSA Z21.86-2016 


Vented Gas-Fired Space Heating Appliances (same as CSA 2.32) 


Fuel Gas, Appliances 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


355 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER 


DOCUMENT TITLE 


APPLICATION 


ANSI Z83.11-2016 
(R2021)/CSA 1.8-2016 
(R2021) 


Gas Food Service Equipment 


Fuel Gas, Appliances 


CSA Z317.1-2021 Special Requirements for Plumbing Installations in Health Care Facilities Miscellaneous 
ENERGY STAR 

Energy Star-2007 Program Requirements for Commercial Ice Machines Miscellaneous 
Energy Star-2012 (version |Program Requirements Product Specification for Commercial Dishwashers Appliances 
2.0) 

Energy Star-2016 (version |Program Requirements for Residential Dishwashers Appliances 
6.0) 

Energy Star-2018 (version |Program Requirements Product specification for Clothes Washers (effective February | Appliances 
8.0) 5, 2018) 

EPA 

EPA/600/R-12/618-2012 Guidelines for Water Reuse Miscellaneous 
EPA WaterSense-2007 High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification Fixtures 

EPA WaterSense-2009 Specification for Flushing Urinals Fixtures 

EPA WaterSense-2014 Specification for Tank-Type Toilets Fixtures 

EPA WaterSense-2015 Specification for Flushometer-Valve Water Closets Fixtures 

EPA WaterSense-2017 Specification for Spray Sprinkler Bodies Miscellaneous 
EPA WaterSense-2018 Specification for Showerheads Fixtures 

EPA WaterSense-2021 Specification for Soil Moisture-Based Irrigation Controllers Irrigation 
EPA WaterSense-2021 Specification for Weather-Based Irrigation Controllers Irrigation 
IAPMO 

ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5110- | Backflow Prevention Assembly Testers Professional 


2015 


Qualifications 


ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5120- | Cross-Connection Control Surveyors Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5130- | Backflow Prevention Assembly Repairers Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5140- | Fire Protection System Cross-Connection Control Tester Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5150- | Backflow Prevention Program Administrators Professional 
2015 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6015- |Bulk Medical Gas/Cryogenic Fluid Central Supply Systems Installers Professional 
2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6040- | Medical Gas Systems Maintenance Personnel Professional 
2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 7010- Installers of Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler Systems for One- and Two- Professional 
2020 Family Dwellings Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 7020- | Inspectors of Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler Systems for One- and Two- Professional 
2020 Family Dwellings Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series |Professional Qualifications Standard for Water Management and Infection Control Professional 
12000-2021 Risk Assessment for Building Systems Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Environment of Care, Infection Control and Construction Risk Assessment Profes- Professional 
12020-2021 sional Qualification Standard for Construction and Maintenance Employers Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Employers and Des- | Professional 
12060-2021 ignated Representatives Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Plumbers Professional 
12061-2021 Qualifications 


356 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Pipefitters and Professional 
12062-2021 HVAC Technicians Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Water Quality Program Professional Qualifications Standard for Sprinkler Fitters Professional 
12063-2021 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Professional Qualifications Standard for Legionella Water Safety and Management X Professional 
12080-2021 Specialist Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Service Plumber and Residential Mechanical Service Technician Professional Quali- | Professional 
13000-2015 (R2020) fications Standard Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Professional Qualifications Standard for the Service Plumber Professional 
13010-2015 (R2020) Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series | Professional Qualifications Standard for Inspectors and Plans Examiners Professional 
16000-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Plumbing Inspector Professional 
16010-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Plumbing Plan Examiner Professional 
16040-2019 Qualifications 
ASSE/ARCSA/IAPMO/ Rainwater Catchment Systems Personnel Professional 
ANSI Series 21000-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Rainwater Catchment Systems Installers Professional 
21110-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Rainwater Catchment Systems Designers Professional 
21120-2017 Qualifications 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Inspectors of Rainwater and Stormwater Catchment Systems Professional 
21130-2017 Qualifications 
ANSI/CAN/IAPMO/ISO Non-Sewered Sanitation Systems - Prefabricated Integrated Treatment Units - იცი | Miscellaneous 
30500-2019 eral Safety and Performance Requirements for Design and Testing 
IAPMO IGC 67-2014?! Specialized ABS and PVC DWV Fittings DWV Components 
IAPMO IGC 193-2020 Safety Plates, Plate Straps, Notched Plates and Safety Collars Miscellaneous 
IAPMO IGC 226-2019 Drinking Water Fountains with or Without Chiller or Heater Fixtures 
IAPMO IGC 244-2021 Tub and Shower Flow-Reduction Systems Valves 
IAPMO IGC 262-2020 Corrugated Thermoplastic Tanks DWV Components 
IAPMO IGC 267-2015! Hydrants Without Integral Backflow Preventers Valves 
IAPMO IGC 276-2019 Bundled Expanded Polystyrene (EPS) Synthetic Aggregate Units DWV Components 
IAPMO IGC 315-2016 Water Manifold Systems Fittings 
IAPMO IGC 327-2016 Flexible Metallic Expansion Joints for Pressure Systems Joints 
IAPMO IGC 330-2018 Recirculating Shower Systems Fixtures 
IAPMO IGC 332-2017a Hydronic Radiators Miscellaneous 
IAPMO IGC 352-2020! Diverter Valves for use in Alternate Nonpotable Water Source System Valves 
IAPMO IS 26-2019? Trenchless Insertion of Polyethylene (PE) Pipe for Sewer Laterals Piping 
IAPMO PS 1-2019 Tank Risers DWV Components 


IAPMO PS 23-2021 


Dishwasher Drain Airgaps 


Backflow Protection 


IAPMO PS 25-2019 Metallic Fittings Joining Polyethylene Pipe for Water Service and Yard Piping Joints 
IAPMO PS 34-2019 Encasement Sleeves for Potable Water Pipe and Tubing Piping 
IAPMO PS 36-2014* Lead-Free Sealing Compounds for Threaded Joints Joints 
IAPMO PS 37-2019 Black Plastic PVC or PE Pressure Sensitive Corrosion Preventive Tape Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 42-2013?! Pipe Alignment and Secondary Support Systems Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 50-2019 Flush Valves with Dual Flush Device for Water Closets or Water Closet Tanks with — Fixtures 


Integral Flush Valves with a Dual Flush Device 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


357 


| 


| 


LI 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 
IAPMO PS 51-2021 Expansion Joints and Flexible Expansion Joints for DWV Piping Systems Joints 
IAPMO PS 52-2021 Pump/Dose, Sumps and Sewage Ejector Tanks with or without a Pump DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 54-2021a Metallic and Plastic Utility Boxes Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 59-2016a€ Wastewater Diverter/Bypass Valves and Diversion Systems Fittings 
IAPMO PS 63-2019 Plastic Leaching Chambers DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 64-2012a°! Roof Pipe Flashings Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 67-2019 Early-Closure Replacement Flappers or Early Replacement Flapper with Mechanical |Fixtures 
Assemblies 
IAPMO PS 69-2019 Bathwaste and Overflow Assemblies with Tub Filler Spout DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 73-2015 Dental Liquid-Ring Vacuum Pumps Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 79-2019 Multiport Electronic Trap Primers DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 81-2019 Precast Concrete Seepage Pit Liners and Covers DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 85-2019 Tools for Mechanically Formed Tee Connections in Copper Tubing Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 86-2019 Rainwater Diverter Valves for Non-Roofed Area Slabs DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 91-2019 Plastic Stabilizers for Use with Plastic Closet Bends DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 92-2013*! Heat Exchangers and Indirect Water Heaters Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 94-2012*! Insulated Protectors for P-Traps, Supply Stops and Risers Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 95-2018? Pipe Support Hangers and Hooks DWV Components 
IAPMO PS 101-2019 Suction Relief Valves Valves 
IAPMO PS 110-2019 PVC Cold Water Compression Fittings Fittings 
IAPMO PS 111-2019 PVC Cold Water Gripper Fittings Fittings 
IAPMO PS 112-2019 PVC Plastic Valves for Cold Water Distribution Systems Outside a Building and Valves 
CPVC Plastic Valves for Hot and Cold Water Distribution Systems 
IAPMO PS 115-2019 Hot Water On-Demand or Automatic Activated Hot Water Pumping Systems Miscellaneous 
IAPMO PS 119-2012a9 Water-Powered Sump Pumps Miscellaneous 


IAPMO/ANSI Z124.7-2013 
(R2018) 


Prefabricated Plastic Spa Shells 


Fixtures, Swimming 
Pools, Spas, and Hot 
Tubs 


IAPMO/ANSI Z124.8- Plastic Liners for Bathtubs and Shower Receptors Fixtures 

2013? (R2018) 

IAPMO/ANSI Z1000-2019 |Prefabricated Septic Tanks DWV Components 
ICC 

ASABE/ICC 802-2014 Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard Irrigation 

ISO 

ANSI/CAN/IAPMO/ISO Non-Sewered Sanitation Systems - Prefabricated Integrated Treatment Units - General | Miscellaneous 
30500-2019 Safety and Performance Requirements for Design and Testing 

MSS 

MSS SP-25-2018 Standard Marking System for Valves, Fittings, Flanges, and Unions Miscellaneous 


MSS SP-42-2013 


Corrosion-Resistant Gate, Globe, Angle, and Check Valves with Flanged and Butt 
Weld Ends (Classes 150, 300, & 600) 


Piping, Ferrous 


MSS SP-44-2019 Steel Pipeline Flanges Fittings 

MSS SP-83-2018 Class 3000 and 6000 Pipe Unions, Socket Welding and Threaded (Carbon Steel, Joints 
Alloy Steel, Stainless Steels, and Nickel Alloys) 

MSS SP-104-2018 Wrought Copper, Solder-Joint Pressure Fittings Fittings 

MSS SP-106-2019 Cast Copper Alloy Flanges and Flanged Fittings: Class 125, 150, and 300 Fittings 

MSS SP-109-2018 Weld-Fabricated, Copper Solder-Joint Pressure Fittings Fittings 


358 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 
MSS SP-123-2018 Non-Ferrous Threaded and Solder-Joint Unions for Use with Copper Water Tube Joints 
NFPA 
NFPA 13R-2022 Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Low-Rise Residential Occupan- | Miscellaneous 
cies 
NFPA 80-2022 Standard for Fire Doors and Other Opening Protectives Miscellaneous 
NFPA 501A-2021 Standard for Fire Safety Criteria for Manufactured Home Installations, Sites, and Miscellaneous 
Communities 
NFPA 1981-2019 Standard on Open-Circuit Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA) for Emer- Miscellaneous 
gency Services 
NFPA 1989-2019 Standard on Breathing Air Quality for Emergency Services Respiratory Protection Miscellaneous 
NFPA 5000-2021 Building Construction and Safety Code Miscellaneous 
NSF 
NSF/ANSI 2-2019 Food Equipment Appliances 
NSF/ANSI 4-2020 Commercial Cooking, Rethermalization, and Powered Hot Food Holding and Trans- | Appliances 
portation Equipment 
NSF/ANSI 5-2019 Water Heaters, Hot Water Supply Boilers, and Heat Recovery Equipment Appliances 
NSF/ANSI 12-2018 Automatic Ice Making Equipment Appliances 
NSF/ANSI 18-2020 Manual Food and Beverage Dispensing Equipment Appliances 
NSF/ANSI 29-2021 Detergent and Chemical Feeders for Commercial Spray-Type Dishwashing Machines | Appliances 
NSF/ANSI 40-2020 Residential Wastewater Treatment Systems DWV Components 
NSF/ANSI 41-2018 Non-Liquid Saturated Treatment Systems DWV Components 
NSF/ANSI 46-2021 Evaluation of Components and Devices Used in Wastewater Treatment Systems DWV Components 


NSF/ANSI/CAN 60-2021 


Drinking Water Treatment Chemicals - Health Effects 


Water Treatment 


NSF/ANSI 169-2020 


Special Purpose Food Equipment and Devices 


Appliances 


NSF/ANSI/CAN 372-2020 


Drinking Water System Components - Lead Content 


Miscellaneous 


SAE 
SAE J512-1997 Automotive Tube Fittings Fittings 
SAE J1670-2008 Type *F" Clamps for Plumbing Applications Joints 
TCNA 
TCNA A118.10-2014 Load Bearing, Bonded, Waterproof Membranes for Thin-Set Ceramic Tile and Miscellaneous 
(R2019) Dimension Stone Installation 
UL 
UL 70-2001 Septic Tanks, Bituminous-Coated Metal DWV Components 
UL 80-2007 Steel Tanks for Oil-Burner Fuels and Other Combustible Liquids (with revisions Fuel Gas 
through April 26, 2019) 
UL 144-2021 LP-Gas Regulators (with revisions through August 26, 2021) Fuel Gas 
UL 252-2017 Compressed Gas Regulators (with revisions through August 10, 2018) Fuel Gas 
UL 296-2017 Oil Burners (with revisions through January 8, 2021) Fuel Gas, Appliances 
UL 404-2010 Gauges, Indicating Pressure, for Compressed Gas Service (with revisions through Fuel Gas 
February 11, 2015) 
UL 429-2013 Electrically Operated Valves (with revisions through March 19, 2021) Valves 
UL 536-2021 Flexible Metallic Hose Fuel Gas 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


359 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


TABLE 1701.2 (continued) 
STANDARDS, PUBLICATIONS, PRACTICES, AND GUIDES 


DOCUMENT NUMBER DOCUMENT TITLE APPLICATION 
UL 563-2009 Ice Makers (with revisions through May 26, 2021) Appliances 
UL 569-2013 Pigtails and Flexible Hose Connectors for LP-Gas (with revisions through July 28, 2017) |Fuel Gas 
UL 726-1995 Oil-Fired Boiler Assemblies (with revisions through October 9, 2013) Fuel Gas, Appliances 
UL 1206-2003 Electric Commercial Clothes-Washing Equipment (with revisions through June 14, | Appliances 
2021) 
UL 1331-2005 Station Inlets and Outlets (with revisions through February 5, 2020) Medical Gas 
UL 1795-2016 Hydromassage Bathtubs (with revisions through December 8, 2017) Fixtures 
UL 1951-2011 Electric Plumbing Accessories (with revisions through June 27, 2020) Miscellaneous 
UL 2157-2018 Electric Clothes Washing Machines and Extractors (with revisions through September | Appliances 
20, 2019) 
WQA 
WQA S-300-2000 Point-of-Use Low-Pressure Reverse Osmosis Drinking Water Systems Appliances 
WQA/ASPE/ANSI S-803- | Sustainable Drinking Water Treatment Systems Miscellaneous 


2017 


360 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


AHAM 
AAMI 


ANSI 
ARCSA 


ASABE 
ASCE 
ASHRAE 


ASME 
ASPE 
ASSE 
ASSP 
ASTM 
AWS 
AWWA 
CFR 


CGA 

CISPI 

CSA 

DOE 

el 

ENERGY STAR 
EPA 


IAPMO 


ICC 
ISEA 
ISO 


MSS 


NFPA 
NSF 
PDI 
SAE 
TCNA 
UL 
WQA 
WSC 


REFERENCED STANDARDS 


ABBREVIATIONS IN TABLE 1701.1 AND TABLE 1701.2 


Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers, 1111 19th Street, NW, Suite 402, Washington, DC 20036. 


Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation, 901 N. Glebe Road, Suite 300, Arlington, VA 
22203. 


American National Standards Institute, Inc., 25 W. 43rd Street, 4th Floor, New York, NY 10036. 


American Rainwater Catchment Systems Association, 6101 Long Prairie Road, Suite 744, PMB 251, Flower 
Mound, TX 75028. 


American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers, 2950 Niles Road, Street Joseph, MI 49085. 
American Society of Civil Engineers, 1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, VA 20191-4400. 


American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1791 Tullie Circle, NE, 
Atlanta, GA 30329-2305. 


American Society of Mechanical Engineering, Two Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990. 
American Society of Plumbing Engineers, 6400 Shafer Court, Suite 350, Rosemont, IL 60018. 
American Society of Sanitary Engineering, 18927 Hickory Creek Drive, Suite 220, Mokena, IL 60448. 
American Society of Safety Professionals, 520 N. Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, IL 60068. 

ASTM International, 100 Barr Harbor Drive, West Conshohocken, PA 19428-2959. 

American Welding Society, 8669 NW 36 Street, #130 Miami, FL 33166-6672. 

American Water Works Association, 6666 W. Quincy Avenue, Denver, CO 80235. 


Code of Federal Regulations, U.S Government Publishing Office, 723 North Capitol Street, N.W. Wash- 
ington, DC 20401-001 


Compressed Gas Association, 14501 George Carter Way, Suite 103, Chantilly, VA 20151. 

Cast-Iron Soil Pipe Institute, 2401 Fieldcrest Drive, Mundelein, IL 60060. 

Canadian Standards Association, 178 Rexdale Boulevard, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, M9W 1R3. 

U.S. Department of Energy, Forrestal Building, 1000 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, DC 20585. 
An editorial change since the last revision or reapproval. 

1200 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20460. 


U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Wastewater Management (4204M), 1200 Pennsylvania 
Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20460. 


International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, 4755 E. Philadelphia Street, Ontario, CA 
91761. 


International Code Council, 500 New Jersey Avenue, NW, 6th Floor, Washington, DC 20001. 
International Safety Equipment Association, 1901 N. Moore Street, Suite 808, Arlington, VA 22209-1762. 


International Organization for Standardization, | ch. de la Voie-Creuse, Casa Postale 56, CH-1211 Geneva 
20, Switzerland. 


Manufacturers Standardization Society of the Valve and Fittings Industry, 127 Park Street, NE, Vienna, 
VA 22180. 


National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, MA 02169-7471. 

NSF International, 789 N. Dixboro Road, Ann Arbor, MI 48105. 

Plumbing and Drainage Institute, 800 Turnpike Street, Suite 300, North Andover, MA 01845. 
Society of Automotive Engineers, 400 Commonwealth Drive, Warrendale, PA 15096. 

Tile Council of North America, Inc. 100 Clemson Research Blvd., Anderson, SC 29625. 
Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., 333 Pfingsten Road, Northbrook, IL 60062. 

Water Quality Association, 4151 Naperville Road, Lisle, IL 60532-3696. 

Water Systems Council, 1101 30th Street, NW, Suite 500, Washington, D.C. 20007. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 361 


362 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDICES 


The appendices are intended to supplement the provisions of the installation requirements of this code. The 
definitions in Chapter 2 are also applicable to the appendices. 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Page 
Appendix A 
Recommended Rules for Sizing the Water Supply Ѕуѕїет......................................................: 365 
Appendix B 
Explanatory Notes on Combination Waste and Vent 5$узїет................ инн нө 381 
Appendix C 
Alternate Plumbing Systems... eet i eiae e da t ee ER ны tag c aee e TREE RR RO 385 
Appendix D 
Sizing Storm Water Drainage I ლთლ:-–-–  "“-______-_-__-__--_-__- nennen nen 395 
Appendix E 
Manufactured/Mobile Home Parks and Recreational Vehicle Parks ............................................................. 405 
Appendix F 
Firefighter Breathing Air Replenishment Systems .....................sssssssssssssseseeeeenneeee nennen ener enne 417 
Appendix G 
Sizing of Venting- Systems erian arnee УС С А e b etta ОК ОО ОЛ laste eter ete 423 
Аррепаїх Н 
Private Sewage Disposal Systems ლო3–––'!._----ა-_-___-__-_-_-__-___- - _-__-__–- 435 
Appendix I 
Installation: Standatds::. 5e enl Ue i edit ce ee "'"”შჩ”"'შშშშთრ“შ"')) 447 
Appendix J 
Combination of Indoor and Outdoor Combustion and Ventilation Opening Оеѕідп....................................... 487 
Appendix K 
Potable Rainwater Catchment Systems ...................ssssssssssssssssssseeeeeeneeee nnne eene nnes retentis nennen nnns 491 
Appendix L 
Sustainable Practices «c intem etie eet be eet t i eet neuere tutu t re tee 497 
Appendix M 
აჭი ა'სსი-იყი».».----"---------_---__-____-__- _- _-_-_ 517 
Appendix N 
Impact of Water Temperature on the Potential for Scalding and Legionella Growth ..................................... 525 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 363 


TABLE OF CONTENTS (continued) 


Appendix O 
Non-Sewered Sanitation Systems ....................ssssssssssssesesee eene eene enne enne sentes entr senten ennt nnne nns 531 


Appendix P 


ფისს. ათის ს. ა. .--“““'სთითსსთVც''!ს"”„'ს"'''!""""'"'''" 535 
Appendix Q 

Indoor Horticultural Facilites. ыиы ванын ины изн йынын Дайны ИНН nennen nnne nennen 539 
Appendix R 

DEAN EE 543 
Appendix S 

იიუ'მუიი““_“Iწ-“ სუა ჟ–=)M""_-______-___-_-_-_-_-_-_______- 547 


364 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX A - RECOMMENDED RULES FOR SIZING THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 | 1-AC АС | SS | SS/CC 1 1R 2 3 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter X X XXX 1 XI XI X XIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended XX 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


A 103.1 XX 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 365 


366 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX A 
RECOMMENDED RULES FOR SIZING THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


A 101.0 General. 


A 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides a general 
procedure for sizing a water supply system. Because of the 
variable conditions encountered, it is impractical to lay down 
definite detailed rules of procedure for determining the sizes 
of water supply pipes in an appendix, which shall necessarily 
be limited in length. For an adequate understanding of the 
problems involved, refer to Water-Distributing Systems for 
Buildings, Report BMS 79 of the National Bureau of Stan- 
dards; and Plumbing Manual, Report BMS 66, also published 
by the National Bureau of Standards. 


A 102.0 Preliminary Information. 


A 102.1 Daily Service Pressure. Obtain the necessary 
information regarding the minimum daily service pressure in 
the area where the building is to be located. 


A 102.2 Water Meter. Where the building supply is to be 
metered, obtain information regarding friction loss relative to 
the rate of flow of meters in the range of sizes likely to be 
used. Friction-loss data is capable of being obtained from 
most manufacturers of water meters. Friction losses for disk- 
type meters shall be permitted to be obtained from Chart A 
102.2. 

A 102.3 Local Information. Obtain available local infor- 
mation regarding the use of different kinds of pipe with 
respect both to durability and to decrease in capacity with the 
length of service in the particular water supply. 


A 103.0 Demand Load. 


A 103.1 Supply Demand. Estimate the supply demand for 
the building main, the principal branches and risers of the sys- 
tem by totaling the fixture units on each, Table A 103.1, and 
then by reading the corresponding ordinate from Chart A 
103.1(1) or Chart A 103.1(2), whichever is applicable. 


Exception: [HCD 1 & HCD 2] For the applicable fixtures, || 
the supply demand flow rate values calculated using Appen- 
dix M may be substituted for the flow rates calculated using 
the fixture units in Table A 103.1 and Chart A 103.1(1) or 
Chart A 103.1(2), whichever is applicable. 


A 103.2 Continuous Supply Demand. Estimate contin- 
uous supply demands in gallons per minute (gpm) (L/s) for 
lawn sprinklers, air conditioners, etc., and add the sum to the 
total demand for fixtures. The result is the estimated supply 
demand of the building supply. 


A 104.0 Permissible Friction Loss. 


A 104.1 Residual Pressure. Decide what is the desirable 
minimum residual pressure that shall be maintained at the 
highest fixture in the supply system. The available residual 
pressure shall be not less than 15 pounds-force per square 
inch (psi) (103 kPa). Where fixtures, fixture fittings, or both 
are installed that require a residual pressure exceeding 15 psi 
(103 kPa), that minimum residual pressure shall be provided. 


CHART A 102.2 
FRICTION LOSSES FOR DISK-TYPE WATER METERS 


PRESSURE LOSS 
(pounds-force per square inch) 


Та 5 6 78910 20 


30 40 5060 80 100 200 


300 400 


600 800 1000 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


367 


APPENDIX A 


A 104.2 Elevation. Determine the elevation of the highest 
fixture or group of fixtures above the water (street) main. 
Multiply this difference in elevation by 0.43. The result 1s the 
loss of static pressure in psi (kPa). 

A 104.3 Available Pressure. Subtract the sum of loss in 
static pressure and the residual pressure to be maintained at 
the highest fixture from the average minimum daily service 
pressure. The result will be the pressure available for friction 
loss in the supply pipes, where no water meter is used. Where 
a meter is to be installed, the friction loss in the meter for the 
estimated maximum demand should also be subtracted from 
the service pressure to determine the pressure loss available 
for friction loss in the supply pipes. 

A 104.4 Developed Length. Determine the developed 
length of pipe from the water (street) main to the highest fix- 
ture. Where close estimates are desired, compute with the aid 
of Table A 104.4(1), Table A 104.4(2), or Table A 104.4(3), 
whichever is applicable, the equivalent length of pipe for fit- 
tings in the line from the water (street) main to the highest 
fixture and add the sum to the developed length. The pres- 
sure available for friction loss in psi (kPa), divided by the 
developed lengths of pipe from the water (street) main to the 
highest fixture, times 100, will be the average permissible 
friction loss per 100 feet (30 480 mm) length of pipe. 


A 105.0 Size of Building Supply. 

A 105.1 Diameter. Knowing the permissible friction loss 
per 100 feet (30 480 mm) of pipe and the total demand, the 
diameter of the building supply pipe shall be permitted to be 
obtained from Chart A 105.1(1), Chart A 105.1(2), Chart A 
105.1(3), Chart A 105.1(4), Chart A 105.1(5), Chart A 
105.1(6), or Chart A 105.1(7), whichever is applicable. The 
diameter of pipe on or next above the coordinate point corre- 
sponding to the estimated total demand and the permissible 
friction loss will be the size needed up to the first branch from 
the building supply pipe. 

A 105.2 Copper and Copper Alloy Piping. Where cop- 
per tubing or copper alloy pipe is to be used for the supply 
piping and where the character of the water is such that slight 
changes in the hydraulic characteristics are expected, Chart A 
105.1(1) shall be permitted to be used. 

A 105.3 Hard Water. Chart A 105.1(2) shall be used for fer- 
rous pipe with the most favorable water supply in regards to 
corrosion and caking. Where the water is hard or corrosive, 
Chart A 105.1(3) or Chart A 105.1(4) will be applicable. For 
extremely hard water, it will be advisable to make additional 
allowances for the reduction of the capacity of hot-water lines 
in service. 


A 106.0 Size of Principal Branches and Risers. 

A 106.1 Size. The required size of branches and risers shall 
be permitted to be obtained in the same manner as the build- 
ing supply, by obtaining the demand load on each branch or 
riser and using the permissible friction loss computed in Sec- 
tion A 104.0. 

A 106.2 Branches. Where fixture branches to the building 
supply are sized for the same permissible friction loss per 100 
feet (30 480 mm) of pipe as the branches and risers to the 


368 


highest level in the building and lead to the inadequate water 

supply to the upper floor of a building, one of the following 

shall be provided: 

(1) Selecting the sizes of pipe for the different branches so 
that the total friction loss in each lower branch is approx- 
imately equal to the total loss in the riser, including both 
friction loss and loss in static pressure. 

(2) Throttling each such branch using a valve until the pre- 
ceding balance is obtained. 

(3) Increasing the size of the building supply and risers 
above the minimum required to meet the maximum per- 
missible friction loss. 


A 106.3 Water Closets. The size of branches and mains 


serving flushometer tanks shall be consistent with sizing pro- 
cedures for flush tank water closets. 


A 107.0 General. 


A 107.1 Velocities. Velocities shall not exceed 10 feet per 
second (ft/s) (3 m/s), except as otherwise approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


A 107.2 Pressure-Reducing Valves. Where a pressure- 
reducing valve is used in the building supply, the developed 
length of supply piping and the permissible friction loss shall 
be computed from the building side of the valve. 

A 107.3 Fittings. The allowances in Table A 104.4(1) for 
fittings are based on non-recessed threaded fittings. For 
recessed threaded fittings and streamlined soldered fittings, 
one-half of the allowances given in the table will be ample. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX A 


TABLE A 103.1 
WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNITS (WSFU) AND MINIMUM FIXTURE BRANCH PIPE SIZES? 


MINIMUM 
FIXTURE 
APPLIANCES, APPURTENANCES, OR FIXTURES? BRANCH PIPE PRIVATE PUBLIC ASSEMBLY 
dicha 
Bathtub or Combination Bath/Shower (fill) Y 4.0 4.0 = 
3^ inch Bathtub Fill Valve % 10.0 10.0 E 
Bidet № 1.0 – – 
Clothes Washer Y 4.0 4.0 — 
Dental Unit, cuspidor l^ - 1.0 - 
Dishwasher, domestic % 1.5 1.5 — 
Drinking Fountain or Water Cooler Y 0.5 0.5 0.75 
Hose Bibb № 2.5 2.5 - 
Hose Bibb, each additional ГА 1.0 1.0 - 
Lavatory № 1.0 1.0 1.0 
Lawn Sprinkler, each head? — 1.0 1.0 Е 
Mobile Home, each (minimum) = 12.0 = E 
Sinks = Е = Е 
Ваг № 1.0 2.0 - 
Clinical Faucet ^ - 3.0 -— 
Clinical Flushometer Valve with or without faucet 1 — 8.0 = 
Kitchen, domestic with or without dishwasher ГА 1.5 1.5 - 
Laundry Y 1.5 1.5 - 
Service or Mop Basin ГА 1.5 3.0 = 
Washup, each set of faucets № - 2.0 - 
Shower per head № 2.0 2.0 - 
Urinal, 1.0 GPF Flushometer Valve 3 3.0 4.0 5.0 
Urinal, greater than 1.0 GPF Flushometer Valve % 4.0 5.0 6.0 
Urinal, flush tank ГА 2.0 2.0 3.0 
Wash Fountain, circular spray % Е 4.0 – 
Water Closet, 1.6 СРЕ Gravity Tank Y 2.5 2.5 3.5 
Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Tank ГА 2.5 2.5 315 
Water Closet, 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve 1 5.0 5.0 8.0 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Gravity Tank M 3.0 5.5 7.0 
Water Closet, greater than 1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve 1 7.0 8.0 10.0 
For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
Notes: 


Size of the cold branch pipe, or both the hot and cold branch pipes. 

Appliances, appurtenances, or fixtures not included in this table shall be permitted to be sized by reference to fixtures having a similar flow rate and frequency 
of use. 

The listed fixture unit values represent their total load on the cold water building supply. The separate cold water and hot water fixture unit value for fixtures 
having both cold and hot water connections shall be permitted to be three-quarters of the listed total value of the fixture. 

4 The listed minimum supply branch pipe sizes for individual fixtures are the nominal (I.D.) pipe size. 

5 For fixtures or supply connections likely to impose continuous flow demands, determine the required flow in gallons per minute (gpm) (L/s) and add it sep- 
arately to the demand in gpm (L/s) for the distribution system or portions thereof. 

Assembly [Public Use (see Table 422.1)]. 

Reduced fixture unit loading for additional hose bibbs is to be used where sizing total building demand and for pipe sizing where more than one hose bibb 
is supplied by a segment of water distribution pipe. The fixture branch to each hose bibb shall be sized by 2.5 fixture units. 


2 


სა 


oo 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 369 


APPENDIX A 


CHART A 103.1(1) 
ESTIMATE CURVES FOR DEMAND LOAD 
500 r- 
| | | 
| I 
400 F · · 
© | | | 
= I 
= | 
Е | | | 
5 300 H= - —- — i ‘ HH — 7 
თ | | | 
c 1 
2 | Lr _ |. 
T | | 
29 M LI | Bi EH | 
І 200 | 
a | | 
= | | | | 
= | 1 | 
ш 
a 100 E ot No. 1 for system predominantly for flushometer valves 
NB", No. 2 for system predominantly for flush tanks 
I 
“II ишин -H EN нини -H L| იუი | 1 1 | |. 
H | | 
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 


FIXTURE UNITS 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


CHART A 103.1(2) 
ENLARGED SCALE DEMAND LOAD 


100 


80 


60 


40 1 


20 


DEMAND - (gallons per minute) 


0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 


FIXTURE UNITS 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


370 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE A 104.4(1) 
ALLOWANCE IN EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF PIPE FOR FRICTION LOSS IN VALVES AND THREADED FITTINGS* 
EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF PIPE FOR VARIOUS FITTINGS 


APPENDIX A 


DIAMETER OF | 90°STANDARD | 45° STANDARD | 90" STANDARD | STRAIGHTRUN | GATEVALVE  GLOBEVALVE | ANGLEVALVE 

(inches) (feet) (feet) (feet) ОЕТЕЕ (feet) (feet) (feet) 
(feet) 

^ 1.0 0.6 1.5 0.3 0.2 8 4 
ГА 2.0 1.2 3.0 0.6 0.4 15 8 
% 25 1.5 4.0 0.8 0.5 20 12 
1 3.0 1.8 5.0 0.9 0.6 25 15 
1⁄4 4.0 2.4 6.0 1.2 0.8 35 18 
1% 5.0 3.0 7.0 1.5 1.0 45 22 
2 7.0 4.0 10.0 2.0 1.3 55 28 
2% 8.0 5.0 12.0 2:5 1.6 65 34 
3 10.0 6.0 15.0 3.0 2.0 80 40 
4 14.0 8.0 21.0 4.0 2.7 125 55 
3 17.0 10.0 25.0 5.0 3.3 140 70 
6 20.0 12.0 30.0 6.0 4.0 165 80 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 degree = 0.017 rad 
* Allowances are based on nonrecessed threaded fittings. Use one-half the allowances for recessed threaded fittings or streamlined solder fittings. 


TABLE A 104.4(2) 


EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF COPPER TUBE SIZE CPVC PIPE FOR VARIOUS FITTINGS 


DIAMETER OF FITTING 90 DEGREE ELBOW 45 DEGREE ELBOW RUN GE SIT 90 DEGREE STANDARD TEE 
(inches) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) 
ГА 1.6 0.8 1.0 3.1 
% 2.1 1.1 1.4 4.1 
1 2.6 1.4 1.7 5.3 
11⁄4 3.5 1.8 2.3 6.9 
1% 4.0 2.1 2;7 8.1 
2 5.2 2.8 3.5 10.3 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


TABLE A 104.4(3) 


EQUIVALENT LENGTH OF SCHEDULE 40 AND 80 CPVC PIPE FOR VARIOUS FITTINGS 


DIAMETER OF FITTING 90 DEGREE ELBOW 45 DEGREE ELBOW საამოა E oo 90 DEGREE STANDARD TEE 
(inches) (feet) (feet) (feet) (feet) 
% 1.5 0.8 1.0 4.0 
% 2.0 1.1 1.4 5.0 
1 2.5 1.4 1.7 6.0 
11⁄4 3.8 1.8 2.3 7.0 
1% 4.0 2.1 2:7 8.0 
2 5.7 2.6 4.3 12.0 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


371 


(әзпшш 4ed suojje6) MOTA 
e © e e 
ლ ლ ლ eo с oo e e e e 
S © ES ез звяз ო a ге 382 т 8 & 
| 


8 

© 

=  :! ' $ 
e 

ს» | | оф 
9 

tc 

Е I. | 

rI 

o 


oo 
e oo 
o © © 
= oo 


кы TTT A hel 


(&jnuiui 49d suojje6) MOTA 


24 EN 


APPENDIX A 


374 


Ferrous Pipe 


Fairly 
Rough 


CHART A 105.1(3) 


10 000 


8000 


6000 


5000 


1-0 4000 


+f 3000 


QI 


1-0 2000 


o 


^^] 1000 


800 


600 
500 


D > ] 400 


300 


200 


100 


80 


60 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


50 


40 


30 


20 


0.1 


02 


0.3 


040506 08 1 


2 3 4 56 


8 


10 


20 


1 


30 40 5060 80 100 


FRICTION LOSS IN HEAD (pounds-force per square inch) PER 100-FOOT LENGTH 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 
1 foot per second = 0.3048 m/s 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


ok 
[oe 


e 
= 
< 
- 


I Е 
= T 

o 0 œ 

TE 

oz 88 

დ ss 

о E Vs 

o o sl 

თ 25 

ти = g 

м — 8 

© и g 

E 

55 

ns 

8-8 

IX “ 


APPENDIX A 


CHART A 105.1(5) 


(әзпиш 1ed suojje5) MOTA 


სა ს». Noo 


30 405060 80100 


NON 


XL Leur 


Á 
§ფ AN GG EE A ЕЗ ПЫ 


Plastic SDR II 
Tubing 
+ Smooth 


ST Th ZX МА МН, 


FRICTION LOSS IN HEAD (pounds-force per square inch) PER 100-FOOT LENGTH 


304.8 mm, 


6.8947 kPa, 1 foot 


0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch — 


25 mm, 1 gallon per minute 


0.3048 m/s 


For SI units: 1 inch 


1 foot per second 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


376 


APPENDIX A 


CHART A 105.1(6) 


ee ТШТ HW 
"SE S^ dH C 24 
= Le = tet 
у aH 
А 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


Ya 


їн 


М ГМ, 


\ 


ТЛ S 
ДД |. 


й 
| 
ii 
" 
а 
\ 
-N 


Jo» 
ШЕ; 40 5060 "80 100 


> MN 


FRICTION LOSS | 


HEAD (pounds-force per square inch) PER 100-FOOT LENGTH 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 
1 foot per second = 0.3048 m/s 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 377 


APPENDIX A 


CHART A 105.1(7) 


(әзпиш 1ed 5VCII66) MOTA 


Геша V- ს -%- % 


IN». 
T AX 
CC. 


ER 
== 
5= 
88 
Es 
| | 
EN 
წ 
== 
— 


= 150 


Plastic Pipe 
C 


Sched. 80 IPS 
Very Smooth 


› 


“2 


FRICTION LOSS IN HEAD (pounds-force per square inch) PER 100-FOOT LENGTH 


304.8 mm, 


6.8947 kPa, 1 foot 


0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch — 


25 mm, 1 gallon per minute 


0.3048 m/s 


For SI units: 1 inch 
1 foot per second 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


378 


A 108.0 Sizing. 


A 108.1 Example. Assume an office building of four stories 
and basement; pressure on the building side of the pressure- 
reducing valve of 55 psi (379 kPa) (after an allowance for 
reduced pressure falloff at peak demand); an elevation of 
highest fixture above the pressure-reducing valve of 45 feet 
(13 716 mm); a developed length of pipe from the pressure- 
reducing valve to the most distant fixture of 200 feet (60 960 
mm); and fixtures to be installed with flush valves for water 
closets and stall urinals as follows: 


Where the pipe material and water supply are such that 
Chart A 105.1(2) applies, the required diameter of the build- 


APPENDIX A 


ing supply is 31⁄2 inches (90 mm), and the required diameter 
of the branch to the hot-water heater is 1^ inches (40 mm). 


The sizes of the various branches and risers shall be per- 
mitted to be determined in the same manner as the size of the 
building supply or the branch to the hot-water system, by esti- 
mating the demand for the riser or branch from Chart A 
103.1(1) or Chart A 103.1(2) and applying the total demand 
estimate from the branch, riser, or section thereof to the 
appropriate flowchart. 


A 108.1 EXAMPLE 


FIXTURE UNITS AND ESTIMATED DEMANDS 
BUILDING SUPPLY DEMAND BRANCH TO HOT WATER SYSTEM 
BUILDING 
SUPPLY FIXTURE UNIT DEMAND 
KIND OF NUMBER OF FIXTURE UNIT NUMBER OF 
TOTAL UNITS DEMAND DEMAND (gallons per 
FIXTURES FIXTURES DEMAND (gallons per FIXTURES CALCULATION minute) 
minute) 
Water Closets 130 8.0 1040 = — = = 
Urinals 30 4.0 120 — — — — 
Showerheads 12 2.0 24 — 12 12x2x4-18 — 
Lavatories 100 1.0 100 = 100 100x 1x 4-7 75 — 
Service Sinks 27 3.0 81 — 27 27x3x4-61 — 
Total = = 1365 252 — 154 55 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square foot = 6.8947 kPa 


Allowing for 15 psi (103 kPa) at the highest fixture under the maximum demand of 252 gallons per minute (15.90 L/s), the pressure available for friction loss 


is found by the following: 


55 — [15 + (45 x 0.43)] = 


The allowable friction loss per 100 feet (30 480 mm) of the pipe is, therefore: 


20.65 psi (142.38 kPa) 


100 x 20.65 + 200 = 10.32 psi (71.15 kPa) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


379 


380 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX B - EXPLANATORY NOTES ON COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 | 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X X ХХ XI XI XXIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 381 


382 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX B 
EXPLANATORY NOTES ON COMBINATION WASTE AND VENT SYSTEMS 


(See Section 910.0 for specific limitations) 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


B 101.0 General. 


B 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides general 
guidelines for the design and installation of a combination 
waste and vent system. 


B 101.2 General Requirements. Combination waste and 
vent systems, (which at best are merely an expedient designed 
to be used in locations where it would be structurally imprac- 
tical to provide continuous venting of fixtures) as outlined in 
Section 910.0 of this code, cover the horizontal wet venting 
of a series of traps using a common waste and vent pipe. Pipe 
sizes not less than two pipe sizes larger than those required for 
a conventional system are designed to maintain a wetted 
perimeter or flow line low enough in the waste pipe to allow 
adequate air movement in the upper portion, thus balancing 
the system. One and two unit fixtures that rough in above the 
floor, shall be permitted to connect to a combination waste 
and vent system when located as required in Section 910.7. 


Combination waste and vent systems are intended pri- 
marily for extensive floor or shower drain installations where 
separate venting is not practical, for floor sinks in markets, 
demonstration or work tables in school buildings, or for sim- 
ilar applications where the fixtures are not adjacent to walls 
or partitions. Due to its oversize characteristics, such a waste 
system is not self-scouring and, consequently, care shall be 
exercised as to the type of fixtures connected to it and the 
location of cleanouts. Given its grease-producing potential, 
restaurant kitchen equipment shall not be connected to a com- 
bination waste and vent system. 


B 101.3 Caution. Caution shall be exercised to exclude 
appurtenances delivering large quantities or surges of water 
(such as pumps, sand interceptors, etc.) from combination 
waste and vent systems so that adequate venting will be main- 
tained. Small fixtures with a waste-producing potential of less 
than 7% gallons per minute (gpm) (0.47 L/s) shall be permit- 
ted to be safely assigned a loading value of one unit. Long 
runs shall be laid at the minimum permissible slope to keep 
tailpieces as short as possible. Tailpieces shall not exceed 2 
feet (610 mm) in length, which shall necessitate slopes up to 
45 degrees (0.79 rad) (see definition of horizontal pipe) on 
some branches. 


B 101.4 Pneumatics. It is essential that the pneumatics of 
such a system be properly engineered, as the air pressure 
within the line shall at all times balance that of outside atmos- 
phere to prevent either trap seal loss or air locking between 
traps. Long mains shall be provided with additional relief 
vents located at intervals not exceeding 100 feet (30 480 mm). 
Each such relief vent shall equal not less than one-half of the 
inside cross-sectional area of the drainpipe served. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


B 101.5 Trap Sizes. Trap sizes are required to be equivalent 
to the branches they serve (two pipe sizes larger than normal), 
and tailpieces between fixtures or floor drains and such traps 
shall be reduced to normal size. 


B 101.6 Layout Drawings. Duplicate layout drawings of 
each such proposed piping system shall be presented to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction and approval obtained before 
an installation is made. Complicated layouts shall be checked 
by qualified personnel. 


B 101.6.1 Example of Sizing. A floor drain normally 
requires a 2 inch (50 mm) trap and waste. On a combi- 
nation waste and vent system, both trap and waste shall 
be increased two pipe sizes (through 24 inches and 3 
inches) (65 mm and 80 mm), which would make the trap 
3 inches (80 mm). Pipe sizes recognized for this purpose 
аге 2 inches, 2% inches, 3 inches, 3! inches, 4 inches, 
41% inches, 5 inches, 6 inches, etc. (50 mm, 65 mm, 80 
mm, 90 mm, 100 mm, 115 mm, 125 mm, 150 mm, etc.). 
The tailpiece between the floor drain and its trap shall be 
2 inches (50 mm) (or normal size) to ensure that the 
amount of wastewater entering the trap partially fills the 
waste branch. A 3 inch (80 mm) floor drain would thus 
require a 4 inch (100 mm) trap, and a 4 inch (100 mm) 
floor drain would require a 5 inch (125 mm) trap for the 
reasons previously stated. 


WHERE IN DOUBT, CHECK WITH YOUR LOCAL 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


383 


384 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 


APPENDIX C - ALTERNATE PLUMBING SYSTEMS 


(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 | 1-AC | AC | SS | SS/CC 1972 13 4 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


385 


386 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX C 
ALTERNATE PLUMBING SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


C 101.0 General. 


C 101.1 Applicability. The intent of this appendix is to pro- 
vide clarification of procedures for the design and approval of 
engineered plumbing systems, alternate materials, and equip- 
ment not specifically covered in other parts of the code. 


C 101.2 Provisions. The provisions of this appendix apply 
to the design, installation, and inspection of an engineered 
plumbing system, alternate material, and equipment. 


C 101.3 Authority Having Jurisdiction. The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction has the right to require descriptive details 
of an engineered plumbing system, alternate material, or 
equipment including pertinent technical data to be filed. 


C 101.4 Standards and Specifications. Components, 
materials, and equipment shall comply with standards and 
specifications listed in Chapter 17 of this code and other 
national consensus standards applicable to plumbing systems 
and materials. 


C 101.5 Alternate Materials and Equipment. Where 
such standards and specifications are not available, alternate 
materials and equipment shall be approved in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 301.3 of this code. 


C 201.0 Definitions. 


C 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 


Branch Interval. A length of soil or waste stack correspon- 
ding in general to a story height, but in no case less than 8 
feet (2438 mm), within which the horizontal branches from 
one floor or story of the building are connected to the stack. 


Engineered Plumbing System. A system designed for a 
specific building project with drawings and specifications 
indicating plumbing materials to be installed, all as prepared 
by a registered design professional. 


C 301.0 Engineered Plumbing Systems. 


C 301.1 Inspection and Installation. In other than one- 
and two-family dwellings, the designer of the system is to 
provide periodic inspection of the installation on a schedule 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Prior to the 
final approval, the designer shall verify to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction that the installation is in accordance with the 
approved plans, specifications, and data and such amend- 
ments to it. The designer shall certify to the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction that the installation is in accordance with the 
applicable engineered design criteria. 

C 301.2 Owner Information. The designer of the system shall 
provide the building owner with information concerning the 
system, considerations applicable for subsequent modifications 
to the system, and maintenance requirements as applicable. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


C 302.0 Water Heat Exchangers. 


C 302.1 Protection from Contamination. Heat exchang- 
ers used for heat transfer, heat recovery, or solar heating shall 
protect the potable water system from being contaminated by 
the heat-transfer medium. 


C 302.2 Single-Wall Heat Exchangers. Single-wall heat 
exchangers shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) The heat-transfer medium is either potable water or con- 
tains essentially nontoxic transfer fluids having a toxic- 
ity rating or class of 1 (see Section 207.0). 


(2) The pressure of the heat-transfer medium is maintained 
at less than the normal minimum operating pressure of 
the potable water system. 


Exception: Steam in accordance with Section C 302.2(1) 
above. 


(3) The equipment is permanently labeled to indicate that 
only additives recognized as safe by the FDA shall be 
used in the heat-transfer medium. 


C 302.3 Alternate Designs. Other heat exchanger designs 
shall be permitted where approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


C 303.0 Fixture Unit Values for Private or Private Use 
Bathroom Groups. 


C 303.1 Fixtures. Table C 303.2 and Table C 303.3 reflect 
the fixture unit loads for the fixtures in bathrooms as groups, 
rather than as individual fixtures. Such fixtures include water 
closets, lavatories, and bathtubs or showers. The tables reflect 
diversity in the use of fixtures within a bathroom and between 
multiple bathrooms. 


C 303.2 Water Supply Fixture Unit Values. The listed 
water supply fixture unit values in Table C 303.2 reflect the 
load of entire bathroom groups on the cold water building 
supply. Individual hot and cold water branch piping to the 
fixtures shall be permitted to be sized in accordance with 
Chapter 6 and Appendix A. 

C 303.3 Drainage Fixture Unit Values. The listed 
drainage fixture unit values in Table C 303.3 reflect a load of 
entire bathroom groups on the sanitary drainage system. 
Where fixtures within bathrooms connect to different 
branches of the drainage system, the fixture unit values for 
the individual fixtures shall be used, as listed in Table 702.1 
of this code. 


C 304.0 Drainage System Sizing. 


C 304.1 Drainage Fixture Units. Drainage fixture unit 
values shall be sized in accordance with Section 702.0 and 
Table 702.1. 


387 


E 


APPENDIX C 


TABLE C 303.2 
WATER SUPPLY FIXTURE UNITS (WSFU) FOR BATHROOM GROUPS? ? 


A р ა 
BATHROOM GROUPS 
COLD нот? сор нот 
Bathroom Groups Having up to 1.6 GPF Gravity-Tank and Pressure Tank Water Closets 
Half-Bath or Powder Room 3.5 0.8 2.5 0.5 
1 Bathroom Group 5.0 2.5 35 1.8 
1% Bathrooms 6.0 2:5 3.0 3.0 
2 Bathrooms 7.0 3.5 3.4 3.4 
2'4 Bathrooms 8.0 3.6 3.8 3.8 
3 Bathrooms 9.0 4.5 4.1 4.1 
Each Additional '^ Bath 0.5 0.1 0.4 0.4 
Each Additional Bathroom Group 1.0 0.5 0.8 0.8 
Other Groups of Fixtures 
Bathroom Group (1.6 GPF Flushometer Value) 6.0 2.5 4.0 1.7 
Kitchen Group (Sink and Dishwasher) 2.0 2.0 1.5 1.5 
Laundry Group (Sink and Clothes Washer) 5.0 5.0 3.0 3.0 


Notes: 


! A bathroom group, for this table, consists of one water closet, up to two lavatories, and either one bathtub or one shower. 
? A half-bath or powder room, for this table, consists of one water closet and one lavatory. 
? Multi-unit dwellings with individual water heaters use the same WSFU as for individual dwellings. 


C 304.2 Size of Building Drain and Building Sewer. 
The maximum number of drainage fixture units allowed on 
the building drain or building sewer of a given size shall be 
in accordance with Table C 304.2. The size of a building drain 
or building sewer serving a water closet shall be not less than 
3 inches (80 mm). 


C 304.3 Size of Horizontal Branch or Vertical Stack. 
The maximum number of drainage fixture units allowed on a 
horizontal branch or vertical soil or waste stack of a given 
size shall be in accordance with Table C 304.3. Stacks shall 
be sized based on the total accumulated connected load at 
each story or branch interval. 


C 304.3.1 Horizontal Stack Offsets. Horizontal 
stack offsets shall be sized in accordance with Table C 
304.2 as required for building drains. 


C 304.3.2 Vertical Stack Offsets. Vertical stack off- 
sets shall be sized in accordance with Table C 304.3 as 
required for stacks. 


C 304.4 Horizontal Stack Offset and Horizontal Branch 
Connections. Horizontal branch connections shall not con- 
nect to a horizontal stack offset or within 2 feet (610 mm) above 
or below the offset where such horizontal offset is located more 
than four branch intervals below the top of the stack. 


C 401.0 Vent System Sizing. 

C 401.1 Size of Vents. The size of vent piping shall be deter- 
mined from the developed length and the total number of 
drainage fixture units connected in accordance with Table C 
401.1. Vents shall be not less than one-half the required size of 
the drainage pipe size served as determined by Table C 304.3 for 
horizontal fixture branches and stacks nor less than 1% inches 


388 


(32 mm) in diameter. The drainage system shall be vented by 
not less than one vent pipe which shall be not less than one-half 
the size of the required building drain and which shall extend 
from the building drain or extension of building drain to the out- 
doors. Vents shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 9. 


C 401.2 Vent Stack. A vent stack shall be required for a 
drainage stack that extends five or more branch intervals 
above the building drain or horizontal branch. The developed 
length of the vent stack shall be measured from the lowest 
connection of a branch vent to the termination outdoors. 


C 401.3 Branch Vents. Where branch vents exceed 40 feet 
(12 192 mm) in developed length, such vent shall be increased 
by one pipe size for the entire developed length of the vent 
pipe. 

C 401.4 Venting Horizontal Offsets. Drainage stacks with 
horizontal offsets shall be vented where five or more branch 
intervals are located above the offset. The upper and lower 
section of the horizontal offset shall be vented in accordance 
with Section C 401.4.1 and Section C 401.4.2. 


C 401.4.1 Venting Upper Section. The vent for the 
upper section of the stack shall be vented as a separate 
stack with a vent stack connection installed at the base of 
the drainage stack. Such vent stack shall connect below 
the lowest horizontal branch or building drain. Where vent 
stack connects to the building drain, the connection shall 
be located downstream of the drainage stack and within a 
distance of 10 times the diameter of the drainage stack. 

C 401.4.2 Venting Lower Section. The vent for the 
lower section of the stack shall be vented by a yoke vent 
connecting between the offset and the next lower hori- 
zontal branch using a wye-branch fitting. The size of the 
yoke vent and connection shall be not less in diameter 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX C 


TABLE C 303.3 
DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT VALUES (DFU) FOR BATHROOM GROUPS! 2 


SERVING 3 OR MORE PRIVATE 


PRIVATE USE BATHROOM GROUP USE BATHROOM GROUP 


Bathroom Groups having 1.6 GPF Gravity-Tank Water Closets 


Half-Bath or Powder Room 3.0 2.0 
1 Bathroom Group 5.0 3.0 
1% Bathrooms 6.0 3.5 
2 Bathrooms 7.0 4.5 
2'^ Bathrooms 8.0 5.0 
3 Bathrooms 9.0 5.5 
Each Additional # Bath 0.5 0.5 
Each Additional Bathroom Group 1.0 1.0 


Bathroom Groups having 1.6 GPF Pressure-Tank Water Closets 


Half-Bath or Powder Room 35 2.5 
1 Bathroom Group 5.5 3.5 
1% Bathrooms 6.5 4.0 
2 Bathrooms ha 5.0 
2'^ Bathrooms 8.5 55 
3 Bathrooms 9.5 6.0 
Each Additional # Bath 0.5 0.5 
Each Additional Bathroom Group 1.0 1.0 


Bathroom Groups having 3.5 GPF Gravity-Tank Water Closets 


Half-Bath or Powder Room 3.0 2.0 
1 Bathroom Group 6.0 4.0 
1% Bathrooms 8.0 5.5 
2 Bathrooms 10.0 6.5 
2^ Bathrooms 11.0 7.5 
3 Bathrooms 12.0 8.0 
Each Additional % Bath 0.5 0.5 
Each Additional Bathroom 1.0 1.0 
Bathroom Group (1.6 GPF Flushometer Valve) 3.0 3.0 
Bathroom Group (3.5 GPF Flushometer Valve) 4.0 4.0 
Notes: 


! A bathroom group, for this table, consists of not more than one water closet, up to two lavatories, and either one bathtub or one shower. 
? A half-bath or powder room, for this table, consists of one water closet and one lavatory. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 389 


APPENDIX C 


TABLE C 304.2 
BUILDING DRAINS AND BUILDING SEWERS! 


DIAMETER MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS FOR SANITARY BUILDING DRAINS AND RUNOUTS FROM STACKS 
OF PIPE SLOPE (inches per foot) 
(inches) Un p^ VA Yo 
2 — — 21 26 
2% = = 24 31 
3 E 20 42? 50? 
4 — 180 216 250 
5 = 390 480 575 
6 — 700 840 1000 
8 1400 1600 1920 2300 
10 2500 2900 3500 4200 
12 3900 4600 5600 6700 
15 7000 8300 10 000 12 000 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m 
Notes: 


! On-site sewers that serve more than one building shall be permitted to be sized according to the current standards and specifications of the administrative 


authority for public sewers. 


2 A maximum of two water closets or two bathroom groups, except in single-family dwellings, where a maximum of three water closets or three bathroom groups 


shall be permitted to be installed. 


TABLE C 304.3 
HORIZONTAL FIXTURE BRANCHES AND STACKS 
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS 
DIAMETER OF 
PIPE ––>კ>» ONE STACK OF THREE STACKS WITH MORE THAN THREE BRANCH INTERVALS 
(inches) BRANCH" OR FEWER BRANCH TOTAL AT ONE BRANCH 
INTERVALS TOTAL FOR STACK INTERVAL 

1% 3 4 8 2 
2 6 10 24 6 

2% 12 20 42 9 
3 20? 48? 72? 20? 
4 160 240 500 90 
5 360 540 1100 200 
6 620 960 1900 350 
8 1400 2200 3600 600 

10 2500 3800 5600 1000 

12 3900 6000 8400 1500 

15 7000 6000 8400 1500 

For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


Notes: 
' Does not include branches of the building drain. 


? A maximum of two water closets or bathroom groups within each branch interval or more than six water closets or bathroom groups on the stack. 


than the required size for the vent serving the drainage 
stack. The yoke vent connection shall be permitted to be 
a vertical extension of the drainage stack. 


C 501.0 Vacuum Drainage Systems. 


C 501.1 General. This section regulates the design and 
installation provisions for vacuum waste drainage systems. 
Plans for vacuum waste drainage systems shall be submitted 
to the Authority Having Jurisdiction for approval and shall 
be considered an engineered designed system. Such plans 
shall be prepared by a registered design professional to per- 


390 


form plumbing design work. Details are necessary to ensure 
compliance with the requirements of this section, together 
with a full description of the complete installation including 
quality, grade of materials, equipment, construction, and 
methods of assembly and installation. Components, materials, 
and equipment shall comply with standards and specifications 
listed in Chapter 17 of this code or approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction and other national consensus stan- 
dards applicable to plumbing systems and materials. Where 
such standards and specifications are not available, alternate 
materials and equipment shall be approved in accordance 
with Section 301.3. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE C 401.1 


APPENDIX C 


SIZE AND LENGTH OF VENTS 


SIZE OF DIAMETER OF VENT REQUIRED (inches) 
SOIL OR FIXTURE 
WASTE UNITS TA 1% 2 2% 3 4 5 6 8 
STACK | CONNECTED 
(inches) MAXIMUM LENGTH OF VENT (feet) 
1% 8 50 150 — — — — — — — 
2 12 30 75 200 — — —— — — — 
2 20 26 50 150 — – — —- — -— 
2” 42 — 30 100 300 — — – – — 
3 10 -— 30 100 100 600 — — — -— 
3 30 — — 60 200 500 — -— — -— 
3 60 — — 50 80 400 — — — — 
4 100 -— — 35 100 260 1000 — — -— 
4 200 — — 30 90 250 900 — — — 
4 500 — — 20 70 180 700 — — — 
5 200 — — — 35 80 350 1000 — — 
5 500 — — — 30 70 300 900 — -— 
5 1100 — — — 20 50 200 700 — — 
6 350 — — — 25 50 200 400 1300 -— 
6 620 — — — 15 30 125 300 1100 — 
6 960 — — — — 24 100 250 1000 — 
6 1900 — — — — 20 70 200 700 — 
8 600 — — — — — 50 150 500 1300 
8 1400 — — — — — 40 100 400 1200 
8 2200 — — — — — 30 80 350 1100 
8 3600 — — — — — 25 60 250 800 
10 1000 — — — —— — — 75 125 1000 
10 2500 — — — — — — 50 100 500 
10 3800 — — — — — — 30 80 350 
10 5600 — — -— — — — 25 60 250 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 


C 501.2 System Design. Vacuum waste drainage systems 
shall be designed and installed in accordance with the manu- 
facturer's installation instructions. A vacuum waste drainage 
system shall include a vacuum generating system, waste col- 
lection center, piping network, vacuum valve, and control 
components used to isolate the vacuum piping network from 
atmospheric pressure and to collect waste at its point of ori- 
gin. Where a vacuum system provides the only means of san- 
itation, the duplicate vacuum generating equipment set to 
operate automatically shall be installed to allow the system 
to continue in operation during periods of maintenance. 


C 501.2.1 Vacuum Generating System. The vac- 
uum generating station shall include vacuum pumps to 
create a constant vacuum pressure within the piping net- 
work and storage tanks. The operation of pumps, collec- 
tion tanks, and alarms shall be automated by controls. 
The vacuum pumps shall be activated on demand and 
accessible for repair or replacement. The vent from the 
vacuum pump shall be provided for vacuum pump air 
exhaust and shall be of a size capable of handling the 
total air volume of the vacuum pump. 


C 501.2.2 Waste Collection Center or Storage 
Tanks. Vacuum collection center or storage tanks shall 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


be of such capacity as to provide storage of waste to pre- 
vent fouling of the system. Such collection or storage 
tank shall be capable of withstanding 150 percent of the 
rated vacuum (negative pressure) created by the vacuum 
source without leakage or collapse. Waste collection cen- 
ter or storage tanks shall be accessible for adjustment, 
repair, or replacement. 


C 501.2.3 Piping Network. The piping network shall 
be under a continuous vacuum and shall be designed to 
withstand 150 percent of the vacuum (negative pressure) 
created by the vacuum source within the system without 
leakage or collapse. Sizing the piping network shall be in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. The 
water closet outlet fitting shall connect with a piping net- 
work having not less than an 1/^ inch (40 mm) nominal 
inside diameter. 

C 501.2.4 Vacuum Interface Valve. A closed vacuum 
interface valve shall be installed to separate the piping net- 
work vacuum from atmospheric pressure. A control device 
shall open the vacuum interface valve where a signal 1s 
generated to remove waste from the plumbing fixture. 

C 501.2.5 Control Components. Where a pneumatic 
signal is generated at the controller, a vacuum from the 


391 


APPENDIX C 


system to open the extraction valve shall be designed to 
operate where vacuum pressure exists to remove the 
accumulated waste. Each tank shall incorporate a level 
indicator switch that automatically controls the discharge 
pump and warns of malfunction or blockage as follows: 


(1) Start discharge. 

(2) Stop discharge. 

(3) Activate an audible alarm where the level of effluent 
is usually high. 


(4) Warning of system shutdown where the tank is full. 


C 501.3 Fixtures. Fixtures utilized in a vacuum waste 
drainage system shall be in accordance with referenced stan- 
dards listed in Chapter 17. Components shall be of corrosion 
resistant materials. The water closet outlet shall be able to 
pass a 1 inch (25.4 mm) diameter ball and shall have a 
smooth, impervious surface. The waste outlet and passages 
shall be free of obstructions, recesses, or chambers that are 
capable of permitting fouling. The mechanical valve and its 
seat shall be of such materials and design to provide a leak- 
free connection where at atmospheric pressure or under vac- 
uum. The flushing mechanism shall be so designed as to 
ensure proper cleansing of the interior surfaces during the 
flushing cycle at a minimum operating flow rate. Mechanical 
seal mechanisms shall withdraw completely from the path of 
the waste discharge during the flushing operation. Each 
mechanical seal vacuum water closet shall be equipped with a 
listed vacuum breaker. The vacuum breaker shall be mounted 
with the critical level or marking not less than 1 inch (25.4 
mm) above the flood-level rim of the fixture. Vacuum break- 
ers shall be installed on the discharge side of the last control 
valve in the potable water supply line and shall be located to 
be protected from physical damage and contamination. 


C 501.4 Drainage Fixture Units. Drainage fixture units 
shall be determined by the manufacturer's instructions. The 
pump discharge load from the collector tanks shall be in 
accordance with this appendix. 


C 501.5 Water Supply Fixture Units. Water supply fixture 
units shall be determined by the manufacturer's instructions. 


C 501.6 Materials. Materials used for water distribution 
pipe and fittings shall be in accordance with Table 604.1. 
Materials used for aboveground drainage shall be in accor- 
dance with Table 701.2 and shall have a smooth bore, and be 
constructed of non-porous material. 


C 501.7 Traps and Cleanouts. Traps and cleanouts shall 
be installed in accordance with Chapter 7 and Chapter 10. 


C 501.8 Testing. The entire vacuum waste system shall be 
subjected to a vacuum test of 29 inches of mercury (98 kPa) 
or not less than the working pressure of the system for 30 
minutes. The system shall be gastight and watertight at all 
points. Verification of test results shall be submitted to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


C 501.9 Manufacturer's Instructions. Manufacturer's 
instructions shall be provided to provide information regard- 
ing safe and proper operating instructions whether or not as 
part of the condition of listing to determine compliance. Such 
instructions shall be submitted and approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. 


392 


C 601.0 Single-Stack Vent System. 


C 601.1 Where Permitted. Single-stack venting shall be 
designed by a registered design professional as an engineered 
design. A drainage stack shall be permitted to serve as a sin- 
gle-stack vent system where sized and installed in accordance 
with Section C 601.2 through Section C 601.10. The drainage | 
stack and branch piping in a single-stack vent system shall 
provide for the flow of liquids, solids, and air without exceed- 
ing the pressure differential described in Section 901.3. 


C 601.2 Stack Size. Drainage stacks shall be sized in accor- 
dance with Table C 601.2. Not more than two water closets 
shall be permitted to discharge to a 3 inch (80 mm) stack. 
Stacks shall be uniformly sized based on the total connected 
drainage fixture unit load, with no reductions in size. 


C 601.2.1 Stack Vent. The drainage stack vent shall have 
a stack vent of the same size terminating to the outdoors. 


C 601.3 Branch Size. Horizontal branches connecting to a 


single-stack vent system shall be sized in accordance with 
Table 703.2. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Not more than one water closet within 18 inches (457 
mm) of the stack horizontally shall be permitted on a 3 
inch (80 mm) horizontal branch. 


(2) A water closet within 18 inches (457 mm) ofa stack hor- 
izontally and one other fixture with up to 1% inch (40 
mm) fixture drain size shall be permitted on a 3 inch (80 
mm) horizontal branch where connected to the stack 
through a sanitary tee. 


C 601.4 Length of Horizontal Branches. Water closets 
shall be not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) horizontally from 
the stack. 


Exception: Water closets shall be permitted to be up to 8 feet 
(2438 mm) horizontally from the stack where connected to 
the stack through a sanitary tee. 


C 601.4.1 Other Fixtures. Fixtures other than water 
closets shall be not more than 12 feet (3658 mm) hori- 
zontally from the stack. 


C 601.4.2 Length of Vertical Piping. The length of 
vertical piping from a fixture trap to a horizontal branch | 
shall not be considered in computing the fixture’s hori- 
zontal distance from the stack. 


C 601.5 Maximum Vertical Drops from Fixtures. Ver- 
tical drops from fixture traps to horizontal branch piping shall 
be one size larger than the trap size, but not less than 2 inches 
(50 mm) in diameter. Vertical drops shall be 4 feet (1219 mm) 
maximum length. Fixture drains that are not increased in size, 
or have a vertical drop exceeding 4 feet (1219 mm) shall be 
individually vented. 


C 601.6 Additional Venting Required. Additional vent- 
ing shall be provided where more than one water closet is on 
a horizontal branch and where the distance from a fixture trap 
to the stack exceeds the limits in Section C 601.4. Where addi- 
tional venting is required, the fixture(s) shall be vented by one 
of the methods described in Section 908.0 through Section 
911.5. The dry vent extensions for the additional venting shall 
connect to a branch vent, vent stack, stack vent, or be extended 
outdoors and terminate to the open air. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE C 601.2 
SINGLE STACK SIZE* 


APPENDIX C 


MAXIMUM CONNECTED DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNITS 


STACK SIZE STACKS LESS THAN STACK 75 FEET TO LESS THAN STACK 160 FEET OR 
(inches) 75 FEET IN HEIGHT 160 FEET IN HEIGHT GREATER IN HEIGHT 
3 24 NP NP 
4 225 24 NP 
5 480 225 24 
6 1015 480 225 
8 2320 1015 480 
10 4500 2320 1015 
12 8100 4500 2320 
15 13 600 8100 4500 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 
* NP = Not permitted 


C 601.7 Stack Offsets. Where there are no fixture drain 
connections below a horizontal offset in a stack, the offset 
does not need to be vented. Where there are fixture drain con- 
nections below a horizontal offset in a stack, the offset shall 
be vented. There shall be no fixture connections to a stack 
within 2 feet (610 mm) above and below a horizontal offset. 


C 601.8 Prohibited Connections Near Base of Stack. 
Where stacks are more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) high, a sep- 
arate stack shall be provided for the fixtures on the lower two 
stories. The stack for the lower two stories shall be permitted 
to be connected to the branch ofthe building drain that serves 
the stack for the upper stories at a point that is not less than 8 
feet (2438 mm) downstream from the base of the upper stack. 
Where stacks are less than 75 feet (22 860 mm) high but more 
than two stories high, the lowest story shall not connect within 
8 feet (2438 mm) downstream from the base of the stack. 
Venting for the lowest story shall be provided in accordance 
with Section C 601.8.1 and Section C 601.8.2. 


C 601.8.1 Conditional Vent. Venting of fixtures on 
the lowest floor shall be in accordance with Section 
908.0 through Section 911.5 and may connect into the 
single-stack as a conditional vent. The conditional vent 
connects into the stack by means of a wye-fitting to pre- 
vent ingress of drainage into the vent. No more than 12 
drainage fixture units (DFU) may be connected into the 
conditional vent and shall connect not less than 8 feet 
(2438 mm) above the stack base. 
C 601.8.2 Other Branch Vent. Other branch vents 
shall be vented in accordance with Section 908.0 through 
Section 911.5. 
C 601.9 Sizing Building Drains and Sewers. In a sin- 
gle-stack vent system, the building drain and branches thereof 
shall be sized in accordance with Table 703.2, and the build- 
ing sewer shall be sized in accordance with Table 717.1. 
C 601.10 Parallel Vent Stacks. Drainage stacks extending 
more than 75 feet (22 860 mm) shall be provided with a par- 
allel vent stack and shall meet the requirements of Section 
907.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


393 


394 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX D - SIZING STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 | 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X XX X ХХ XI XI XXIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 395 


396 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX D 
SIZING STORM WATER DRAINAGE SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


D 101.0 General. 


D 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides general 
guidelines for the sizing of storm water drainage systems 
based on maximum rates of rainfall for various cities. The 
rainfall rates in Table D 101.1 shall be permitted to be used 
for design unless higher values are established locally. 


D 102.0 Sizing by Flow Rate. 


D 102.1 General. Storm drainage systems shall be permitted 
to be sized by storm water flow rates, using the gallons per 
minute per square foot [(L/s)/m?] of rainfall listed in Table D 
101.1 for the local area. Multiplying the listed gallons per 
minute per square foot [(L/s)/nv] by the roof area being drained 
(in square feet) (m?) by each inlet produces the gallons per 
minute (gpm) (L/s) of required flow for sizing each drain inlet. 
The flow rates shall be permitted to be added to determine the 
flows in each of the drainage systems. Required pipe sizes for 
various flow rates are listed in Table 1103.1 and Table 1103.2. 


D 103.0 Sizing by Roof Area. 


D 103.1 General. Storm drainage systems shall be permit- 
ted to be sized using the roof area served by each of the 


drainage systems. Maximum allowable roof areas with vari- 
ous rainfall rates are listed in Table 1103.1 and Table 1103.2, 
along with the required pipe sizes. By using this method, it 
shall be permitted to interpolate between two listed rainfall 
rate columns (inches per hour) (mm/h). To determine the 
allowable roof area for a listed pipe size at a listed slope, 
divide the allowable square feet (m?) of the roof for a 1 inch 
per hour (in/h) (25.4 mm/h) rainfall rate by the listed rainfall 
rate for the local area. For example, the allowable roof area 
for a 6 inch (150 mm) drain at /4 inch per foot (10.4 mm/m) 
slope with a rainfall rate of 3.2 in/h (81 mm/h) is 21 400/3.2 
— 6688 square feet (621.3 m?). 


D 104.0 Capacity of Rectangular Scuppers. 

D 104.1 General. Table D 104.1 lists the discharge capac- 
ity of rectangular roof scuppers of various widths with vari- 
ous heads of water. The maximum allowable level of water on 
the roof shall be obtained from the registered design profes- 
sional, based on the design of the roof. 


TABLE D 101.1 
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* 


STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 
STATES AND CITIES 
inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

ALABAMA — — 

Birmingham 3.7 0.038 
Huntsville 3.3 0.034 
Mobile 4.5 0.047 
Montgomery 3.8 0.039 
ALASKA - — 

Aleutian Islands 1.0 0.010 
Anchorage 0.6 0.006 
Bethel 0.8 0.008 
Fairbanks 1.0 0.010 
Juneau 0.6 0.006 
ARIZONA — — 

Flagstaff 2.3 0.024 
Phoenix 2:2 0.023 
Tucson 3.0 0.031 
ARKANSAS — — 

Eudora 3.8 0.039 
Ft. Smith 3.9 0.041 
Jonesboro 3.5 0.036 
Little Rock 3.7 0.038 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


397 


APPENDIX D 


TABLE D 101.1 


MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* (continued) 


STATES AND CITIES 


STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 


inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

CALIFORNIA Е = 
Eureka 1.5 0.016 
Lake Tahoe 1.3 0.014 
Los Angeles 2.0 0.021 
Lucerne Valley 25 0.026 
Needles 1.5 0.016 
Palmdale 3.0 0.031 
Redding 1.5 0.016 
San Diego 1.5 0.016 
San Francisco 1.5 0.016 
San Luis Obispo 1.5 0.016 
COLORADO — = 
Craig 1.5 0.016 
Denver 22 0.023 
Durango 1.8 0.019 
Stratton 3.0 0.031 
CONNECTICUT — — 
Hartford 2.8 0.029 
New Haven 3.0 0.031 
DELAWARE – – 
Dover 3.5 0.036 
Rehobeth Beach 3.6 0.037 
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA - - 
Washington 4.0 0.042 
FLORIDA — — 
Daytona Beach 4.0 0.042 
Ft. Myers 4.0 0.042 
Jacksonville 4.3 0.045 
Melbourne 4.0 0.042 
Miami 4.5 0.047 
Palm Beach 5.0 0.052 
Tampa 4.2 0.044 
Tallahassee 4.1 0.043 
GEORGIA — — 
Atlanta 3.5 0.036 
Brunswick 4.0 0.042 
Macon 3.7 0.038 
Savannah 4.0 0.042 
Thomasville 4.0 0.042 
HAWAII — — 
Rainfall rates in the Hawaiian Islands vary from 1% inches per hour to 8 inches per hour, depending on location and elevation. Consult local data. 
IDAHO — ES 
Boise 1.0 0.010 
Idaho Falls 1.2 0.012 
Lewiston 1.0 0.010 
Twin Falls 1.1 0.011 


398 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX D 


TABLE D 101.1 


MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* (continued) 


STATES AND CITIES 


STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 


inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

ILLINOIS — — 

Chicago 2.7 0.028 
Harrisburg 3.1 0.032 
Peoria 2.9 0.030 
Springfield 3.0 0.031 
INDIANA — = 

Evansville 3.0 0.031 
Indianapolis 2.8 0.029 
Richmond 2.7 0.028 
South Bend 2:7 0.028 
IOWA - - 

Council Bluffs 3:7 0.038 
Davenport 3.0 0.031 
Des Moines 34 0.035 
Sioux City 3.6 0.037 
KANSAS — — 

Goodland 3.5 0.036 
Salina 3.8 0.039 
Topeka 3.8 0.039 
Wichita 3.9 0.041 
KENTUCKY - - 

Bowling Green 2.9 0.030 
Lexington 2.9 0.030 
Louisville 2.8 0.029 
Paducah 3.0 0.031 
LOUISIANA - — 

Monroe 3.8 0.039 
New Orleans 4.5 0.047 
Shreveport 4.0 0.042 
MAINE — — 

Bangor 2.2 0.023 
Kittery 2.4 0.025 
Millinocket 2.0 0.021 
MARYLAND z — 

Baltimore 3.6 0.037 
Frostburg 2.9 0.030 
Ocean City 3.7 0.038 
MASSACHUSETTS — — 

Adams 2.6 0.027 
Boston 2.7 0.028 
Springfield 2.7 0.028 
MICHIGAN — — 

Detroit 2:5 0.026 
Grand Rapids 2.6 0.027 
Kalamazoo 2.7 0.028 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


399 


APPENDIX D 


TABLE D 101.1 
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* (continued) 


STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 
STATES AND CITIES 
inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

Sheboygan 2.1 0.022 
Traverse City 2.2 0.023 
MINNESOTA - - 

Duluth 2.6 0.027 
Grand Forks 25 0.026 
Minneapolis 3.0 0.031 
Worthington 3.4 0.035 
MISSISSIPPI — — 

Biloxi 4.5 0.047 
Columbus 3.5 0.036 
Jackson 3.8 0.039 
MISSOURI - - 

Independence 3.7 0.038 
Jefferson City 3.4 0.035 
St. Louis 3.2 0.033 
Springfield 3.7 0.038 
MONTANA - — 

Billings 1.8 0.019 
Glendive 2:5 0.026 
Great Falls 1.8 0.019 
Missoula 1.3 0.014 
NEBRASKA — — 

Отаһа 3.6 0.037 
North Platte 3.5 0.036 
Scotts Bluff 2.8 0.029 
NEVADA - - 

Las Vegas 1.5 0.016 
Reno 1.2 0.012 
Winnemucca 1.0 0.010 
NEW HAMPSHIRE - - 

Berlin 2.2 0.023 
Manchester 2.5 0.026 
NEW JERSEY - — 

Atlantic City 34 0.035 
Paterson 3.0 0.031 
Trenton 3.2 0.033 
NEW MEXICO = — 

Albuquerque 2.0 0.021 
Carlsbad 2.6 0.027 
Gallup 2.1 0.022 
NEW YORK — — 

Binghamton 2.4 0.025 
Buffalo 2.3 0.024 


400 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX D 


TABLE D 101.1 
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* (continued) 


STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 
STATES AND CITIES 
inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

New York City 3.1 0.032 
Schenectady 2.5 0.026 
Syracuse 2.4 0.025 
NORTH CAROLINA — — 

Asheville 3.2 0.033 
Charlotte 3.4 0.035 
Raleigh 4.0 0.042 
Wilmington 4.4 0.046 
NORTH DAKOTA - = 

Bismarck 2.7 0.028 
Fargo 2.9 0.030 
Minot 2.6 0.027 
OHIO — — 

Cincinnati 2.8 0.029 
Cleveland 2.4 0.025 
Columbus 2.7 0.028 
Toledo 2.6 0.027 
Youngstown 2.4 0.025 
OKLAHOMA = — 

Boise City 3.4 0.035 
Muskogee 4.0 0.042 
Oklahoma City 4.1 0.043 
OREGON = E 

Medford 1.3 0.014 
Ontario 1.0 0.010 
Portland 1.3 0.014 
PENNSYLVANIA = - 

Erie 2.4 0.025 
Harrisburg 2.9 0.030 
Philadelphia 3.2 0.033 
Pittsburgh 2.5 0.026 
Scranton 2.8 0.029 
RHODE ISLAND — — 

Newport 3.0 0.031 
Providence 2.9 0.030 
SOUTH CAROLINA = - 

Charleston 4.1 0.043 
Columbia 3.5 0.036 
Greenville 33 0.034 
SOUTH DAKOTA - - 

Lemmon 2.7 0.028 
Rapid City 2.7 0.028 
Sioux Falls 3.4 0.035 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 401 


APPENDIX D 


TABLE D 101.1 
MAXIMUM RATES OF RAINFALL FOR VARIOUS CITIES* (continued) 


STATES AND CITIES STORM DRAINAGE 60-MINUTE DURATION, 100-YEAR RETURN 
inches per hour gallons per minute per square foot 

TENNESSEE = = 

Knoxville 3.1 0.032 
Memphis 3.5 0.036 
Nashville 3.0 0.031 
TEXAS — — 

Corpus Christi 4.6 0.048 
Dallas 4.2 0.044 
El Paso 2.0 0.021 
Houston 4.6 0.048 
Lubbock 3.3 0.034 
San Antonio 4.4 0.046 
UTAH — — 

Bluff 2.0 0.021 
Cedar City 1.5 0.016 
Salt Lake City 1.3 0.014 
VERMONT e E 

Bennington 2.5 0.026 
Burlington 2.3 0.024 
Rutland 24 0.025 
VIRGINIA — — 

Charlottesville 3.4 0.035 
Norfolk 4.0 0.042 
Richmond 4.0 0.042 
Roanoke 3.3 0.034 
WASHINGTON e = 

Seattle 1.0 0.010 
Spokane 1.0 0.010 
Walla Walla 1.0 0.010 
WEST VIRGINIA - — 

Charleston 2.9 0.030 
Martinsburg 3.0 0.031 
Morgantown 2.7 0.028 
WISCONSIN e E 

Green Bay 2.5 0.026 
Lacrosse 2.9 0.030 
Milwaukee 2.7 0.028 
Wausau 2.5 0.026 
WYOMING E = 

Casper 1.9 0.020 
Cheyenne 2.5 0.026 
Evanston 1.3 0.014 
Rock Springs 1.4 0.015 


For SI units: 1 inch per hour = 25.4 mm/h, 1 gallon per minute per square foot = 0.679 [(L/sy/m?] 
* The rainfall rates in this table are based on U.S. Weather Bureau Technical Paper No. 40, Chart 14: 100-Year 60-Minute Rainfall (inches). 


402 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE D 104.1 


DISCHARGE FROM RECTANGULAR SCUPPERS (gallons per minute)’: 2 34 


APPENDIX D 


WATER HEAD 


WIDTH OF SCUPPER (inches) 


(inches) 6 12 18 24 30 36 
ГА 6 13 19 25 32 38 

1 17 35 53 71 89 107 
1% 31 64 97 130 163 196 

2 — 98 149 200 251 302 
2% = 136 207 278 349 420 

3 — 177 271 364 458 551 
3% — — 339 457 575 693 

4 — — 412 556 700 844 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


Notes: 


! Table D 104.1 is based on discharge over a rectangular weir with end contractions. 
? The head is the depth of water above the bottom of the scupper opening. 

3 The height of the scupper opening shall be not less than two times the design head. 
^ Coordinate the allowable head of water with the structural design of the roof. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


403 


404 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX E - MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 405 


406 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX E 
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE HOME PARKS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


E 101.0 Manufactured/Mobile Home Park. 


E 101.1 Applicability. The manufactured home park plumb- 
ing and drainage systems shall be designed and installed in 
accordance with the requirements of this appendix and the 
requirements of this code. 


E 101.2 Construction Documents. Before plumbing or 
sewage disposal facilities are installed or altered in a manu- 
factured home park, duplicate construction documents shall 
be filed and proper permits obtained from the department or 
departments having jurisdiction. Plans shall show in detail: 


(1) Plot plan of the park drawn to scale, indicating eleva- 
tions, property lines, driveways, existing or proposed 
buildings, and the sizes of manufactured home lots. 

(2) Complete specification and piping layout of proposed 
plumbing systems or alteration. 


(3) Complete specification and layout of proposed sewage 
disposal system or alteration. 


(4) The nature and extent of the work proposed, showing 
clearly that such work will conform to the provisions of 
this code. 


E 201.0 Definitions. 


| E 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 


Manufactured/Mobile Home. A structure transportable in 
one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is 8 feet 
(2438 mm) or more in width and 40 feet (12 192 mm) or more 
in length or, where erected on-site, is 320 square feet (29.73 
m°) or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis, and 
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent 
foundation where connected to the required utilities. It 
includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electri- 
cal systems contained therein. For further clarification of def- 
inition, see Federal Regulation 24 CFR. 


Manufactured/Mobile Home Accessory Building or 
Structure. A building or structure that is an addition to or 
supplements the facilities provided to a manufactured home. 
Itis not a self-contained, separate, habitable building or struc- 
ture. Examples are awnings, cabanas, ramadas, storage struc- 
tures, carports, fences, windbreaks, or porches. 


Manufactured/Mobile Home Lot. A portion of a manu- 
factured home park designed for the accommodation of one 
manufactured home and its accessory buildings or structures 
for the exclusive use of the occupants. 
Manufactured/Mobile Home Park. A parcel (or contigu- 
ous parcels) of land that has been so designated and improved 
that it contains two or more manufactured home lots avail- 
able to the general public for the placement thereon of a man- 
ufactured home for occupancy. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Recreational Vehicle (RV). A vehicular-type unit prima- 
rily designed as temporary living quarters for recreational, 
camping, travel, or seasonal use that either has its own motive 
power or is mounted on or towed by another vehicle. The 
basic entities are camping trailer, fifth-wheel trailer, motor 
home, park trailer, travel trailer, and truck camper. 


Recreational Vehicle Park. A plot of land upon which two 
or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established or 
maintained for occupancy by recreational vehicles ofthe gen- 
eral public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vaca- 
tion purpose. 

Recreational Vehicle Site. Within a recreational vehicle 
park, a plot of ground intended for the accommodation of a 
recreational vehicle, a tent, or another individual camping unit 
on a temporary basis. 


E 301.0 Manufactured/Mobile Home Park Drainage 
System Construction. 


E 301.1 General. A drainage system shall be provided in 
manufactured home parks for conveying and disposing of 
sewage. Where feasible, the connection shall be made to a 
public system. New improvements shall be designed, con- 
structed, and maintained in accordance with applicable laws 
and regulations. Where the drainage lines of the manufac- 
tured home park are not connected to a public sewer, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall approve sewage disposal 
facilities prior to construction. 


E 301.2 Underground Drainage System Location, 
Size, and Slope. Drainage (sewage) collection lines shall 
be located in trenches at an approved depth to be free of 
breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be sepa- 
rated from the park water supply system as specified in this 
code. Drainage (sewage) lines shall have a minimum size and 
slope as specified in Table E 301.2(1) and Table E 301.2(2). 


TABLE E 301.2(1) 
DRAINAGE PIPE DIAMETER AND NUMBER OF 
FIXTURE UNITS ON DRAINAGE SYSTEM 


SIZE OF DRAINAGE MAXIMUM NUMBER OF 
(inches) FIXTURE UNITS 

2* 8 

3 35 

4 256 
5 428 
6 720 
8 2640 
10 4680 
12 8200 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 
* Except for six unit fixtures 


407 


APPENDIX E 


TABLE E 301.2(2) 
MINIMUM GRADE AND SLOPE OF DRAINAGE PIPE 


PIPE SIZE Ns nd PIPE SIZE ში d 
inches inches inches inches 
2 25 6 8 
3 25 8 4 
4 15 10 3% 
5 11 12 3 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, | inch per foot = 83.3 mm/m 


E 301.2.1 Inlet, System, and Lateral Sizing. Each 
manufactured home lot drainage inlet shall be assigned a 
waste loading value of 12 drainage fixture units, and each 
park drainage system shall be sized in accordance with 
Table E 301.2(1) or as provided herein. Drainage later- 
als shall be not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in diameter. 


E 301.2.2 Engineered Design. A park drainage sys- 
tem that exceeds the fixture unit loading of Table E 
301.2(1) or in which the grade and slope of drainage pipe 
do not meet the minimum specified in Table E 301.2(2) 
shall be designed by a registered design professional. 


E 301.2.3 Materials. Pipe and fittings installed under- 
ground in manufactured home park drainage systems 
shall be of a material approved for the purpose. Manu- 
factured home lot drainage inlets and extensions to grade 
shall be of a material approved for underground use 
within a building. 
E 301.3 Lot Drainage Inlet. Provision shall be made for 
plugging or capping the sewage drain inlet where a manufac- 
tured home does not occupy the lot. Surface drainage shall be 
diverted away from the inlet. The rim of the inlet shall extend 
to a maximum of 4 inches (102 mm) aboveground elevation. 


E 301.3.1 Location. Each lot drainage inlet shall be 
located in the third rear section and within 4 feet (1219 
mm) of the proposed location ofthe manufactured home. 


E 301.3.2 Materials. Materials used for drainage con- 
nections between a manufactured home, and the lot 
drainage inlet shall be semi-rigid, corrosion resistant, 
nonabsorbent, and durable. The inner surface shall be 
smooth. 


E 301.4 Drain Connector. A manufactured home shall be 
connected to the lot drainage inlet using a drain connector con- 
sisting of approved pipe not less than Schedule 40, approved 
fittings and connectors, and not less in size than the manufac- 
tured home drainage outlet. An approved cleanout shall be 
provided between the manufactured home and the lot drainage 
inlet. The fitting connected to the lot drainage inlet shall be a 
directional fitting to discharge the flow into the drainage inlet. 


E 301.4.1 Grade and Gastightness. A drain connec- 
tor shall be installed or maintained with a grade not less 
than 1⁄4 inch per foot (20.8 mm/m). A drain connector 
shall be gastight and no longer than necessary to make 
the connection between the manufactured home outlet 
and the drain inlet on the lot. A flexible connector shall be 
permitted to be used at the lot drainage inlet area. Each lot 
drainage inlet shall be capped gastight where not in use. 


408 


E 302.0 Manufactured/Mobile Home Park Water Sup- 
ply. 

E 302.1 Potable Water Supply. An accessible and 
approved supply of potable water shall be provided in each 
manufactured home park. Where a public supply of water of 
approved quantity, quality, and pressure is available at or 
within the boundary of the park site, the connection shall be 
made to it and its supply used exclusively. Where an 
approved public water supply is not available, a private water 
supply system shall be developed and used as approved by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


E 302.2 Water Service Outlet. Each manufactured home 
lot shall be provided with a water service outlet delivering 
potable water. The water service outlet riser shall be not less 
than % of an inch (20 mm) nominal pipe size and capable of 
delivering 12 water supply fixture units. 


E 302.2.1 Connection. A manufactured home shall be 
connected to the park water service outlet by a flexible 
connector, such as copper or copper alloy or other 
approved material not less than % of an inch nominal (20 
mm) interior diameter. 


E 302.2.2 Water Supply Fixture Units. Park water 
distribution systems shall be designed to deliver a mini- 
mum of 12 water supply fixture units to each lot and 
installed with materials in accordance with Chapter 6, 
Appendix A, or both of this code. 


E 302.2.3 Pressure. Each manufactured home park 
water distribution system shall be so designed and main- 
tained as to provide a pressure of not less than 20 pounds- 
force per square inch (psi) (138 kPa) at each manufactured 
home lot at maximum operating conditions. 


E 302.2.4 Location. Each lot water service outlet shall 
be located in the third rear section and within 4 feet (1219 
mm) of the proposed location of the manufactured home. 


E 302.3 Shutoff Valve. A separate water shutoff valve shall 
be installed in each water service outlet at each manufactured 
home lot. Where a listed backflow protective device is 
installed, the service shutoff shall be located on the supply 
side of such device. 


E 302.4 Backflow Preventer. Where a condition exists in 
the plumbing of a manufactured home that creates a cross- 
connection, a listed backflow preventer shall be installed in 
the water service line to the manufactured home at or near the 
water service outlet. Where a hose bibb or outlet is installed 
on the supply outlet riser in addition to the service connec- 
tor, a listed backflow preventer shall be installed on each 
additional outlet. 


E 302.5 Pressure-Relief Valve. Where it is required to 
install a backflow preventer at the manufactured home lot 
service outlet, a listed pressure-relief valve shall be installed 
in the water service line on the discharge side of the back- 
flow preventer. Pressure-relief valves shall be set to release at 
a pressure at a maximum of 150 psi (1034 kPa). Pressure- 
relief valves shall discharge toward the ground. Backflow 
preventers and pressure-relief valves shall be not less than 12 
inches (305 mm) above the ground. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


E 302.6 Mechanical Protection. Park water service out- 
lets, backflow preventers, and pressure-relief valves shall be 
protected from damage by vehicles or other causes. Such pro- 
tection shall be permitted to consist of posts, fencing, or other 
permanent barriers. 


E 302.7 Water-Conditioning Equipment. A permit shall 
be obtained from the Authority Having Jurisdiction before 
installing water-conditioning equipment on a manufactured 
home lot. Approval of the park operator 1s required on appli- 
cations for a permit to install such equipment. Where the 
water-conditioning equipment is ofthe regenerating type, and 
the park drainage system discharges into a public sewer, 
approval of the sanitary district or agency having jurisdiction 
over the public sewer is required. 


E 302.71 Approval. Regenerating water-conditioning 
equipment shall be listed and labeled by an approved list- 
ing agency. 

E 302.72 Installation. Regenerating units shall dis- 
charge the effluent of regeneration into a trap not less 
than 1% inches (40 mm) in diameter connected to the 
manufactured home park drainage system. An approved 
air gap shall be installed on the discharge line a mini- 
mum of 12 inches (305 mm) above the ground. 


E 302.8 Testing. Installations shall be tested and inspected 
in accordance with Chapter 3 of this code. 


E 401.0 Fuel Supply. 


E 401.1 Fuel Gas Piping Systems. АП fuel gas piping sys- 
tems serving manufactured homes, accessory buildings, or 
structures and communities shall be designed and constructed 
in accordance with any applicable provisions of NFPA 54 and 
NFPA 58. NFPA 31 shall apply to oil fuel-burning systems and 
shall conform to the criteria of the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion. [NFPA 501A:4.1.1.1 — 4.1.1.2] 


E 401.2 Gas Supply Connections. Gas supply connec- 
tions at sites, where provided from an underground gas sup- 
ply piping system, shall be located and arranged to permit 
attachment to a manufactured home occupying the site. 


For the installation of liquefied petroleum gas (LP-Gas) 
storage systems, the provisions of NFPA 58 shall be fol- 
lowed. [NFPA 501A:4.1.2.1 — 4.1.2.2] 


E 401.3 Location of Gas Supply Connection. The gas 
supply to the manufactured home shall be located within 4 
feet (1219 mm) of the manufactured home stand. 


Exception: The requirement of Section E 401.3 shall not 
apply to gas supply connections for manufactured homes 
located on all-weather wood, concrete, or concrete block foun- 
dation systems or on foundations constructed in accordance 
with the local building code or, in the absence of a local code, 
with a recognized model building code. [NFPA 501A:4.1.3] 


E 401.4 Recreational Vehicle Park Fuel Gas Equip- 
ment and Installations. Fuel gas equipment and installa- 
tions shall comply with this appendix, except as otherwise 
permitted or required by this code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX E 


E 402.0 Single and Multiple Manufactured Home Site 
Fuel Supply Systems. 


E 402.1 Underground Installations. Underground gas 
piping system installations shall comply with any applicable 
building code, Section E 402.2 and Section E 402.2.1. [NFPA 
501A:4.2.1] 


E 402.2 Open-Ended Gastight Conduit. Underground 
gas piping shall not be installed beneath that portion of a man- 
ufactured home site reserved for the location of a manufac- 
tured home or manufactured home accessory building or 
structure unless installed in the open-ended gastight conduit 
of Section E 402.2.1. [NFPA 501A:4.2.1.1] 


E 402.2.1 Requirements. The open-ended gastight 

conduit shall conform to the requirements in the follow- 

ing: 

(1) The conduit shall be not less than Schedule 40 pipe 
that is approved for underground installation 
beneath buildings. 


(2) The interior diameter of the conduit shall be not less 
than 4 of an inch (15 mm) larger than the outside 
diameter of the gas piping. 

(3) The conduit shall extend to a point not less than 4 
inches (102 mm) beyond the outside wall of the 
manufactured home or accessory building or struc- 
ture, and the outer ends shall not be sealed. 


(4) Where the conduit terminates within a manufactured 
home or accessory building or structure, it shall be 
accessible, and the space between the conduit and the 
gas piping shall be sealed to prevent leakage of gas 
into the building. [NFPA 501A:4.2.1.2 — 4.2.1.2.4] 


E 402.3 Shutoff Valve. Each manufactured home site shall 
have a listed gas shutoff valve installed upstream of the man- 
ufactured home site gas outlet. The gas shutoff valve shall be 
located on the outlet riser at a height of not less than 6 inches 
(152 mm) above grade. A gas shutoff valve shall not be 
located under any manufactured home. The outlet shall be 
equipped with a cap or plug to prevent discharge of gas when- 
ever the manufactured home site outlet is not connected to a 
manufactured home. [NFPA 501A:4.2.2.1 — 4.2.2.4] 


Exception: Gas shutoff valves shall conform to Section E 
402.3, except for manufactured homes located on foundations 
constructed in accordance with the local building code or, in 
the absence of a local code, with a recognized model building 
code. [NFPA 501A:4.2.2] 


E 402.4 Gas Meters. Where installed, gas meters shall be 
supported by a post or bracket placed on a firm footing or other 
means providing equivalent support and shall not depend on 
the gas outlet riser for support. [NFPA 501A:4.2.3.1] 


E 402.4.1 Location of Meters. Each gas meter shall 
be installed in an accessible location and shall be pro- 
vided with unions or other fittings so that the meter can 
be removed easily and placed in an upright position. 
Meters shall not be installed in unventilated or inacces- 
sible locations or closer than 3 feet (914 mm) to sources 
of ignition. [NFPA 501A:4.2.3.2 — 4.2.3.2.2] 


409 


APPENDIX E 


E 402.4.2 Meter Shutoff Valve or Cock. All gas 
meter installations shall be provided with shutoff valves 
or cocks located adjacent to and on the inlet side of the 
meters. In the case ofa single meter installation utilizing 
an LP-Gas container, the container service valve shall be 
permitted to be used in lieu of the shutoff valve or cock. 
All gas meter installations shall be provided with test tees 
located adjacent to and on the outlet side of the meters. 
[NFPA 501A:4.2.4.1 — 4.2.4.3] 


E 403.0 Multiple Manufactured Home Site Fuel Dis- 
tribution and Supply Systems. 


E 403.1 Manufactured Home Community LP-Gas 
Supply Systems. Where 10 or more customers are served 
by one LP-Gas supply system, the installation ofthe gas sup- 
ply system shall be in accordance with 49 CFR 192. Other 
types of liquefied petroleum gas supply systems and the stor- 
age and handling of LP-Gas shall be in accordance with 
NFPA 58 (See also Section E 403.10). [NFPA 501A:4.3.2.1 
— 4.32.2] 


E 403.2 Required Gas Supply. The minimum hourly vol- 
ume of gas required at each manufactured home site outlet or 
any section ofthe manufactured home community gas piping 
system shall be calculated as shown in Table E 403.2. 


In extreme climate areas, additional capacities other than 
those in Table E 403.2 shall be considered. [NFPA 501A:4.3.4.1 
—4.3.42] 


TABLE E 403.2 
DEMAND FACTORS FOR USE IN CALCULATING GAS PIPING 
SYSTEMS IN MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITIES 
[NFPA 501A: TABLE 4.3.4.1] 


NUMBER OF MANUFACTURED BTU/H PER MANUFACTURED 
HOME SITES HOME SITE 

1 125 000 

2 117 000 

3 104 000 

4 96 000 

5 92 000 

6 87 000 

9 83 000 

8 81 000 

9 79 000 

10 77 000 
11-20 66 000 
21-30 62 000 
31-40 58 000 
41-60 55 000 
Over 60 50 000 


For SI units: 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW 


E 403.3 Size. The size of each section of a gas piping sys- 
tem shall be determined in accordance with NFPA 54/ANSI 
Z223.1 or by other standard engineering methods acceptable 
to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. [NFPA 501А:4.3.5.1] 


410 


E 403.4 Pressure. Where all connected appliances are 
operated at their rated capacity, the gas supply pressure shall 
be not less than 7 inches water column (1.7 kPa). The gas sup- 
ply pressure shall not exceed 14 inches water column (3.5 
kPa). [NFPA 501A:4.3.5.2] 


E 403.5 Metal Gas Piping. Metal gas pipe shall be stan- 
dard-weight wrought iron or steel (galvanized or black), yel- 
low brass containing not more than 75 percent copper, or 
internally tinned or treated copper of iron pipe size. Galva- 
nizing shall not be considered protection against corrosion. 


Seamless copper or steel tubing shall be permitted to be 
used with gases not corrosive to such material. Steel tubing 
shall comply with ASTM A254. Copper tubing shall comply 
with ASTM B88 (Type K or Type L) or ASTM B280. Cop- 
per tubing (unless tin-lined) shall not be used if the gas con- 
tains more than an average of 0.3 grains of hydrogen sulfide 
per 100 standard cubic feet (scf) of gas (0.7 mg/100 L). 
[NFPA 501A:4.3.6.1.1 — 4.3.6.1.6] 


E 403.6 Protection Coatings for Metal Gas Piping. 
All buried or submerged metallic gas piping shall be protected 
from corrosion by approved coatings or wrapping materials. 
All gas pipe protective coatings shall be approved types, shall 
be machine applied, and shall conform to recognized stan- 
dards. Field wrapping shall provide equivalent protection and 
is restricted to those short sections and fittings that are nec- 
essarily stripped for threading or welding. Risers shall be 
coated or wrapped to a point at least 6 inches (152 mm) above 
ground. [NFPA 501A:4.3.6.2.1 — 4.3.6.2.4] 


E 403.7 Plastic Piping. Plastic piping shall only be used 
underground and shall meet the requirements of ASTM 
D2513 or ASTM D2517, as well as the design pressure and 
design limitations of 49 CFR 192.123, and shall otherwise | 
conform to the installation requirements thereof. (NFPA 
501А:4.3.6.3} 


Е 403.8 Gas Piping Installation. All gas piping installed 
below ground level shall have a minimum earth cover of 18 
inches (457 mm) and shall be installed with at least 12 inches 
(305 mm) of clearance in any direction from any other under- 
ground utility system. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.1] 


E 403.8.1 Metallic Gas Piping. All metallic gas pip- 
ing systems shall be installed in accordance with 
approved plans and specifications, including provisions 
for cathodic protection. Each cathodic protection system 
shall be designed and installed to conform to the provi- 
sions of 49 CFR 192. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.2.1, 4.3.7.2.2] 


E 403.8.2 Cathodic Protection. Where the cathodic 
protection system is designed to protect only the gas pip- 
ing system, the gas piping system shall be electrically 
isolated from all other underground metallic systems or 
installations. Where only the gas piping system is cathod- 
ically protected against corrosion, a dielectric fitting shall 
be used in the manufactured home gas connection to 
insulate the manufactured home from the underground 
gas piping system. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.2.3, 4.3.7.2.4] 


E 403.8.3 Underground Metallic Systems. Where 
a cathodic protection system is designed to provide all 
underground metallic systems and installations with pro- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tection against corrosion, all such systems and installa- 
tions shall be electrically bonded together and protected 
as a whole. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.2.5] 


E 403.8.4 Plastic Gas Piping. Plastic gas piping shall 
be used only underground and shall be installed with an 
electrically conductive wire for locating the pipe. The 
wire used to locate the plastic pipe shall be copper, not 
smaller in size than 18 AWG, with insulation approved 
for direct burial. Every portion of a plastic gas piping 
system consisting of metallic pipe shall be cathodically 
protected against corrosion. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.3.1 — 
4.3.7.3.3] 


E 403.9 Gas Piping System Shutoff Valve. An accessi- 
ble and identifiable shutoff valve controlling the flow of gas 
to the entire manufactured home community gas piping sys- 
tem shall be installed in a location acceptable to the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction and near the point of connection to 
the service piping or to the supply connection of an LP-Gas 
container. [NFPA 501A:4.3.7.4] 


E 403.10 Liquefied Petroleum Gas Equipment. LP- 
Gas equipment shall be installed in accordance with the appli- 
cable provisions of NFPA 58. [NFPA 501A:4.3.8] 


E 403.11 Oil Supply. The following three methods of sup- 
plying oil to an individual manufactured home site shall be 
permitted: 


(1) Supply from an outside underground tank (see Section E 
404.6). 


(2) Supply from a centralized oil distribution system 
designed and installed in accordance with accepted engi- 
neering practices and in compliance with NFPA 31. 


(3) Supply from an outside aboveground tank (see Section E 
404.6). [NFPA 501A:4.3.9] 


E 403.12 Minimum Oil Supply Tank Size. Oil supply 
tanks shall have a minimum capacity equal to 20 percent of 
the average annual oil consumption. [NFPA 501A:4.3.10] 


E 403.13 Oil Supply Connections. Oil supply connec- 
tions at manufactured home sites, where provided from a cen- 
tralized oil distribution system, shall be located and arranged 
to permit attachment to a manufactured home utilizing the 
stand. [NFPA 501A:4.3.11.1] The installation of such facili- 
ties shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) The main distribution pipeline shall be permitted to be 
connected to a tank or tanks having an aggregate capac- 
ity not exceeding 20 000 gallons (75 708 L) at a point 
below the liquid level. 


(2) Where this piping is so connected, a readily accessible 
internal or external shutoff valve shall be installed in the 
piping as close as practicable to the tank. 

(3) If external and aboveground, the shutoff valve and its 
tank connections shall be made of steel. 

(4) Connections between the tank(s) and the main pipeline 
shall be made with double swing joints or flexible con- 
nectors, or shall otherwise be arranged to permit the 
tank(s) to settle without damaging the system. 


(5) If located aboveground, the connections specified in Sec- 
tion E 403.13(4) shall be located within the diked area. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX E 


(6) A readily accessible and identified manual shutoff valve 
shall be installed either inside or outside of the structure 
in each branch supply pipeline that enters a building, 
mobile home, travel trailer, or other structure. If inside, | 
the valve shall be located directly adjacent to the point at 
which the supply line enters the structure. If outside, the 
valve shall be protected from weather and damage. 


(7) A device shall be provided in the supply line at or ahead 
of the point where it enters the interior of the structure 
that will automatically shut off the oil supply, if the sup- 
ply line between this device and the appliance is broken. 
This device shall be located on the appliance side of the 
manual shutoff valve required in Section E 403.13(6) and 
shall be solidly supported and protected from damage. 


(8) Means shall be provided to limit the oil pressure at the 
appliance inlet to a maximum gauge pressure of 3 
pounds-force per square inch gauge (psig) (21 kPa). If a 
pressure-reducing valve is used, it shall be a type 
approved for the service. 


(9) A device shall be provided that will automatically shut 
offthe oil supply to the appliance if the oil pressure at the 
appliance inlet exceeds a gauge pressure of 8 psig (55 
kPa). The device shall not be required under either of the | 
following conditions: 


(a) Where the distribution system is supplied from a 
gravity tank and the maximum hydrostatic head of 
oil in the tank 1s such that the oil pressure at the 
appliance inlet will not exceed a gauge pressure of 8 
psig (55 kPa). 


(b) Where a means is provided to automatically shut off 
the oil supply if the pressure-regulating device pro- 
vided in accordance with Section E 403.13(8) fails 
to regulate the pressure as required. 


(10) Only appliances equipped with primary safety controls 
specifically listed for the appliance shall be connected to 
a centralized oil distribution system. [NFPA 31:9.2.10 — 
9.2.15] 


E 404.0 Fuel Supply Systems Installation. 


E 404.1 Flexible Gas Connector. Except for manufac- 
tured homes located on an all-weather wood, concrete, or con- 
crete block foundation system or on a foundation constructed 
in accordance with the local building code or, in the absence 
of a local code, with a recognized model building code, each 
gas supply connector shall be listed for outside manufactured 
home use, shall be not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) in length, 
and shall have a capacity rating to supply the connected load. 
[NFPA 501A:4.4.1] 


E 404.2 Use of Approved Pipe and Fittings of Exten- 
sion. Where it is necessary to extend a manufactured home 
inlet to permit connection of the 6 foot (1829 mm) listed con- 
nector to the site gas outlet, the extension shall be of approved 
materials of the same size as the manufactured home inlet and 
shall be adequately supported at no more than 4 foot (1219 
mm) intervals to the manufactured home. [NFPA 501A:4.4.2] 


411 


APPENDIX E 


E 404.3 Mechanical Protection. All gas outlet risers, reg- 
ulators, meters, valves, and other exposed equipment shall be 
protected against accidental damage. [NFPA 501A:4.4.3] 


E 404.4 Special Rules on Atmospherically Con- 
trolled Regulators. Atmospherically controlled regulators 
shall be installed in such a manner that moisture cannot enter 
the regulator vent and accumulate above the diaphragm. 
Where the regulator vent is obstructed due to snow and icing 
conditions, shields, hoods, or other suitable devices shall be 
provided to guard against closing of the vent opening. [NFPA 
501A:4.4.4.1 — 4.4.4.2] 


E 404.5 Fuel Gas Piping Test. The manufactured home fuel 
gas piping system shall be tested only with air before it is con- 
nected to the gas supply. The manufactured home gas piping 
system shall be subjected to a pressure test with all appliance 
shutoff valves in their closed positions. [NFPA 501 #:4.4.5 | 


E 404.5.1 Procedures. The fuel gas piping test shall 
consist of air pressure at not less than 10 inches water 
column or more than 14 inches water column (2.5 kPa 
to 3.5 kPa). The fuel gas piping system shall be isolated 
from the air pressure source and shall maintain this pres- 
sure for not less than 10 minutes without perceptible 
leakage. Upon satisfactory completion of the fuel gas 
piping test, the appliance valves shall be opened, and the 
gas appliance connectors shall be tested with soapy water 
or bubble solution while under the pressure remaining in 
the piping system. Solutions used for testing for leakage 
shall not contain corrosive chemicals. Pressure shall be 
measured with a manometer, slope gauge, or gauge that 
is calibrated in either water inch (mm) or psi (kPa) with 
increments of either 40inch (2.5 mm) or opsi (0.7 kPa) 
gauge, as applicable. Upon satisfactory completion of the 
fuel gas piping test, the manufactured home gas supply 
connector shall be installed, and the connections shall be 
tested with soapy water or bubble solution. [NFPA 
501A:4.4.5.1.1 — 4.4.5.1.6] 


E 404.5.2 Warning. The following warning shall be 
supplied to the installer: 


WARNING: Do not overpressurize the fuel gas piping 
system. Damage to valves, regulators, and appliances can 
occur due to pressurization beyond the maximums spec- 
ified. [NFPA 501A:4.4.5.2] 

E 404.5.3 Vents. Gas appliance vents shall be visually 
inspected to ensure that they have not been dislodged in 
transit and are connected securely to the appliance. 
[NFPA 501A:4.4.5.3] 

E 404.6 Oil Tanks. Oil tank capacities shall comply with 

the following: 

(1) No more than one 660 gallon (2498 L) tank or two tanks 
with an aggregate capacity of 660 gallons (2498 L) or 
less shall be connected to one oil-burning appliance. 

(2) Two supply tanks, where used, shall be cross-connected 
and provided with a single fill and single vent, as 
described in NFPA 31 and shall be on a common slab 
and rigidly secured, one to the other. 


412 


(3) Tanks having a capacity of 660 gallons (2498 L) or less 
shall be securely supported by rigid, noncombustible 
supports to prevent settling, sliding, or lifting. [NFPA 
501A:4.4.6] 


E 404.6.1 Installation. Oil supply tanks shall be 
installed in accordance with the applicable provisions of 
NFPA 31. [NFPA 501A:4.4.6.1] 


E 404.6.2 Capacity. A tank with a capacity no larger 
than 60 gallons (227 L) shall be permitted to be a DOT- 
5 shipping container (drum), and so marked, or a tank 
meeting the provisions of UL 80. Tanks other than DOT- 
5 shipping containers having a capacity of not more than 
660 gallons (2498 L) shall meet the provisions of UL 80. 
Pressure tanks shall be built in accordance with Section 
VIII, Pressure Vessels of the ASME Boiler and Pressure 
Vessel Code. [NFPA 501A:4.4.6.2.1 — 4.4.6.2.2] 


E 404.6.3 Location. Tanks, as described in Section E 
404.6 and Section E 404.6.2, that are adjacent to build- 
ings shall be located not less than 10 feet (3048 mm) 
from a property line that is permitted to be built upon. 
[NFPA 501A:4.4.6.3] 


E 404.6.4 Vent. Tanks with a capacity no larger than 660 
gallons (2498 L) shall be equipped with an open vent no 
smaller than 1% inch (40 mm) iron pipe size; tanks with а 
500 gallon (1892 L) or less capacity shall have a vent of 
1% inch (32 mm) iron pipe size. [NFPA 501A:4.4.6.4] 


E 404.6.5 Liquid Level. Tanks shall be provided with 
a means of determining the liquid level. [NFPA 
501A:4.4.6.5] 


E 404.6.6 Fill Opening. The fill opening shall be a size 
and in a location that permits filling without spillage. 
[NFPA 501A:4.4.6.6] 


E 405.0 Manufactured Home Accessory Building 
Fuel Supply Systems. 


E 405.1 General. Fuel gas supply systems installed in a 
manufactured home accessory building or structure shall 
comply with the applicable provisions of NFPA 54 and NFPA 
58. Fuel oil supply systems shall comply with the applicable 
provisions of NFPA 31. [NFPA 501А:4.5.1 — 4.5.2] 


E 406.0 Community Building Fuel Supply Systems 
in Manufactured Home Communities. 


E 406.1 Fuel Gas Piping and Equipment Installa- 
tions. Fuel gas piping and equipment installed within a per- 
manent building in a manufactured home community shall 
comply with nationally recognized appliance and fuel gas pip- 
ing codes and standards adopted by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. Where the state or other political subdivision 
does not assume jurisdiction, such fuel gas piping and equip- 
ment installations shall be designed and installed in accor- 
dance with the applicable provisions of NFPA 54 or NFPA 
58. [NFPA 501A:4.6.1.1 — 4.6.1.2] 


E 406.2 Oil Supply Systems. Oil burning equipment and 
installation within a manufactured home community shall be 
designed and constructed in accordance with the applicable 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


codes and standards adopted by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. Where the state or other political subdivision does 
not assume jurisdiction, such installations shall be designed 
and constructed in accordance with the applicable provisions 
of NFPA 31. [NFPA 501А:4.6.2.1 — 4.6.2.2] 


E 406.3 Oil-Burning Equipment and Installation. Oil 
burning equipment and installation within a building con- 
structed in a manufactured home community in accordance 
with the local building code or a nationally recognized build- 
ing code shall comply with nationally recognized codes and 
standards adopted by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Where the state or other political subdivision does not assume 
jurisdiction, such oil-burning equipment and installations 
shall be designed and installed in accordance with the appli- 
cable provisions of NFPA 31. [NFPA 501A:4.6.3.1 — 4.6.3.2] 


E 406.4 Inspections and Tests. Inspections and tests for 
fuel gas piping shall be made in accordance with Chapter 1 
and Chapter 12 of this code. 


E 501.0 Recreational Vehicle Parks. 


E 501.1 Plumbing Systems. Plumbing systems shall be 
installed in accordance with the plumbing codes of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction and with this appendix. 


E 501.2 Toilet Facilities. Water closets and urinals shall be 
provided at one or more locations in a recreational vehicle 
park. They shall be of convenient access and shall be located 
within a 500 foot (152 m) radius from a recreational vehicle 
site not provided with an individual sewer connection. 


E 501.2.1 Signage. Facilities for males and females 
shall be appropriately marked. 


E 501.2.2 Interior Finish. The interior finish of walls 
shall be moisture resistant to a height of not less than 4 
feet (1219 mm) to facilitate washing and cleaning. 


E 501.2.3 Receptacle. Each toilet room for women 
shall be provided with a receptacle for sanitary napkins. 
The receptacle shall be of durable, impervious, readily 
cleanable material, and shall be provided with a lid. 


E 501.2.4 Ceiling Height and Doors. A toilet facil- 
ity shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet (2134 
mm) and, unless the artificial light is provided, a win- 
dow or skylight area equal to not less than 10 percent of 
the floor area shall be provided. 


Doors to the exterior shall open outward, be self- 
closing, and shall be visually screened using a vestibule 
or wall to prevent a direct view of the interior where the 
exterior doors are open. Such screening shall not be 
required on single toilet units. 


E 501.2.5 Ventilation. A toilet facility shall have perma- 
nent, non-closable, screened opening(s), having a total area 
not less than 5 percent ofthe floor area and opening directly 
to the exterior to provide proper ventilation. A listed 
exhaust fan(s), vented to the exterior, the rating of which in 
cubic feet per minute (L/s) is not less than 25 percent ofthe 
total volume of the room(s) served, shall be considered as 
meeting the requirements of this section. Openable win- 
dows and vents to the outside shall be provided with fly- 
proof screens of not less than number 16 mesh. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX E 


E 501.3 Water Closets. Not less than one water closet shall 
be provided for each sex up to the first 25 sites. For each addi- 
tional 25 sites not provided with sewer connections, an addi- 
tional water closet shall be provided. 


E 501.3.1 Application. Water closets shall be of an 
approved, elongated bowl type and shall be provided 
with seats with open fronts. 


E 501.3.2 Compartment. Each water closet shall be 
in a separate compartment and shall be provided with a 
latched door for privacy. A holder or dispenser for toilet 
paper shall be provided. Dividing walls or partitions shall 
be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) high and shall be sep- 
arated from the floor by a space not exceeding 12 inches 
(305 mm). 


E 501.3.3 Size. Water closet compartments shall be not 
less than 30 inches (762 mm) in width [no water closet 
shall be set closer than 15 inches (381 mm) from its cen- 
ter to a side wall] and shall be not less than 30 inches 
(762 mm) of clear space in front of each water closet. 


E 501.4 Lavatories. Where water-supplied water closets are 
provided, an equal number of lavatories shall be provided for 
up to six water closets. One additional lavatory shall be pro- 
vided for each two water closets where more than six water 
closets are required. Each lavatory basin shall have a piped 
supply of potable water and shall drain into the drainage sys- 
tem. 


E 501.5 Urinals. Where separate facilities are provided for 
men and women, urinals shall be acceptable for not more than 
one-third of the water closets required in the men's facilities, 
except that one urinal shall be permitted to be used to replace 
a water closet in a minimum park. Individual stall or wall- 
hung types of urinals shall be installed. Floor-type trough 
units shall be prohibited. 


E 501.6 Floors and Drains. The floors shall be constructed 
of material impervious to water and shall be easily cleanable. 
A building having water-supplied water closets shall be pro- 
vided with a floor drain in the toilet room. This drain shall be 
provided with means to protect the trap seal in accordance 
with this code. 


E 501.7 Shower Size. Each shower, where provided, shall 
have a floor area of 36 inches by 36 inches (914 mm by 914 
mm), shall be capable of encompassing a 30 inch (762 mm) 
diameter circle and shall be of the individual type. The 
shower area shall be visually screened from view with a min- 
imum floor area of 36 by 36 inches (914 mm by 914 mm) per 
shower. Each shall be provided with individual dressing areas 
screened from view and shall contain a minimum of one 
clothing hook and stool (or bench area). 


E 501.71 Drainage Connection. Each shower area 
shall be designed to minimize the flow of water into the 
dressing area and shall be connected to the drainage system 
using a properly trapped and vented inlet. Each such area 
shall have an impervious, skid-resistant surface; wooden 
racks (duck boards) over shower floors shall be prohibited. 


E 501.8 Drinking Fountains. Where provided, drinking 
fountains shall be in accordance with the requirements of this 
code. 


413 


APPENDIX E 


E 502.0 Recreational Vehicle Park Potable Water 
Supply and Distribution. 


E 502.1 Quality. The supply or supplies of water shall com- 
ply with the potable water standards of the state, local health 
authority or, in the absence thereof, with the Drinking Water 
Standard of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency. 


E 502.2 Sources. Water approved by a regulating agency 
shall be acceptable. Where an approved public water supply 
system is available, it shall be used. Where the park has its 
own water supply system, the components of the system shall 
be approved. A water supply system that is used on a seasonal 
basis shall be provided with means for draining. 


E 502.3 Prohibited Connections. The potable water sup- 
ply shall not be connected to a nonpotable or unapproved 
water supply, nor be subjected to backflow or backsiphonage. 


E 502.4 Supply. The water supply system shall be designed 
and constructed in accordance with the following: 


(1) A minimum of25 gallons (95 L) per day per site for sites 
without individual water connections. 


(2) A minimum of 50 gallons (189 L) per day per site for 
sites with individual water connections. 


(3) A minimum of 50 gallons (189 L) per day per site where 
water-supplied water closets are provided in restrooms. 


E 502.5 Pressure and Volume. Where water is distrib- 
uted under pressure to an individual site, the water supply sys- 
tem shall be designed to provide a minimum flow pressure of 
not less than 20 psi (138 kPa) with a minimum flow of 2 gal- 
lons per minute (gpm) (0.1 L/s) at an outlet. The pressure 
shall not exceed 80 psi (552 kPa). 


E 502.6 Outlets. Water outlets shall be convenient to access 
and, where not piped to individual recreational vehicle sites, 
shall not exceed 300 feet (91 m) from a site. Provisions shall 
be made to prevent accumulation of standing water or the cre- 
ation of muddy conditions at each water outlet. 


E 502.7 Storage Tanks. Water storage tanks shall be con- 
structed of impervious materials, protected against contami- 
nation, and provided with locked, watertight covers. Overflow 
or ventilation openings shall be down-facing and provided 
with a corrosion-resistant screening of not less than number 
24 mesh to prevent the entrance of insects and vermin. Water 
storage tanks shall not have direct connections to sewers. 


E 503.0 Recreational Vehicle Park Water Connec- 
tions for Individual Recreational Vehicles. 


E 503.1 Location. Where provided, the water connections 
for potable water to individual recreational vehicle sites shall 
be located on the left rear half of the site (left side of recre- 
ational vehicle) within 4 feet (1219 mm) of the stand. 


E 503.2 Water Riser Pipe. Each potable water connection 
shall consist of a water riser pipe that is equipped with a 
threaded male spigot located not less than 12 inches (305 mm) 
but not more than 24 inches (610 mm) above grade level for 
the attachment of a standard water hose. The water riser pipe 
shall be protected from physical damage in accordance with 
this code. This connection shall be equipped with a listed anti- 
siphon backflow prevention device. 


414 


E 504.0 Recreational Vehicle Park Drainage System. 
E 504.1 Where Required. An approved drainage system 
shall be provided in recreational vehicle parks for conveying 
and disposing of sewage. Where available, parks shall be con- 
nected to a public sewer system. 

E 504.2 Location. Sewer lines shall be located to prevent 
damage from vehicular traffic. 

E 504.3 Materials. Pipe and fittings installed in the drainage 
system shall be of material listed, approved, and installed in 
accordance with this code. 

E 504.4 Pipe Sizes. The minimum diameters of drainage 


laterals, branches, and mains serving recreational vehicle sites 
shall be in accordance with Table E 504.4. 


TABLE E 504.4 
PIPE SIZES 


RECREATIONAL VEHICLE MINIMUM PIPE SIZES 
STANDS SERVED (inches) 
5 3 
36 4 
71 5 
120 6 
440 8 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


E 504.5 Cleanouts. Cleanouts shall be provided in accor- 
dance with Chapter 7 of this code. 


E 504.6 Drainage Inlet. Where provided, the site drainage 
system inlet connections for individual recreational vehicles 
shall be located to prevent damage by the parking of recre- 
ational vehicles or automobiles and shall consist of a sewer 
riser extending vertically to grade. The minimum diameter of 
the sewer riser pipe shall be not less than 3 inches (80 mm) in 
diameter, and shall be provided with a 4 inch (100 mm) inlet 
or not less than a 3 inch (80 mm) female fitting. 


E 504.6.1 Location. Where provided, the sewer inlet to 
individual recreational vehicle sites shall be located on 
the left rear half of the site (left side of the recreational 
vehicle) within 4 feet (1219 mm) of the stand. 

E 504.6.2 Protection. The sewer riser pipe shall be 
firmly imbedded in the ground and protected against 
damage from movement. It shall be provided with a 
tight-fitting plug or cap, which shall be secured by a 
durable chain (or equivalent) to prevent loss. 


E 505.0 Recreational Vehicle Park Sanitary Disposal 
Stations. 

E 505.1 Where Required. One recreational vehicle sani- 
tary disposal station shall be provided for each 100 recre- 
ational vehicle sites, or part thereof, which are not equipped 
with individual drainage system connections. 

E 505.2 Access. Each station shall be level and convenient 
of access from the service road and shall provide easy ingress 
and egress for recreational vehicles. 

E 505.3 Construction. Unless other approved means are 
used, each station shall have a concrete slab with the drainage 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


system inlet located to be on the road (left) side of the recre- 
ational vehicle. The slab shall be not less than 3 feet by 3 feet 
(914 mm by 914 mm), not less than 3% inches (89 mm) thick 
and properly reinforced. The slab surface 1s to be troweled to 
a smooth finish and sloped from each side inward to a 
drainage system inlet. 


The drainage system inlet shall consist of a 4 inch (102 
mm), self-closing, foot-operated hatch of approved material 
with the cover milled to fit tight. The hatch body shall be set 
in the concrete of the slab with the lip of the opening flush 
with its surface to facilitate the cleansing of the slab with 
water. The hatch shall be properly connected to a drainage 
system inlet, which shall discharge to an approved sanitary 
sewage disposal facility. 


E 505.4 Flushing Device. Where the recreational vehicle 
park 1s provided with a piped water supply system, means for 
flushing the recreational vehicle holding tank and the sani- 
tary disposal station slab shall be provided that consists of a 
piped supply of water under pressure, terminating in an out- 
let located and installed to prevent damage by automobiles or 
recreational vehicles. The flushing device shall consist of a 
properly supported riser terminating not less than 2 feet (610 
mm) above the ground surface, with a % of an inch (20 mm) 
valved outlet adaptable for a flexible hose. 


The water supply to the flushing device shall be protected 
from backflow using a listed vacuum breaker or backflow 
prevention device located downstream from the last shutoff 
valve. 


Adjacent to the flushing arrangement shall be posted a 
sign of durable material not less than 2 feet by 2 feet (610 
mm by 610 mm) in size. Inscribed thereon in clearly legible 
letters shall be the following: 


"DANGER - NOT TO BE USED FOR DRINKING OR 
DOMESTIC PURPOSES." 


E 506.0 Recreational Vehicle Park Water Supply Sta- 
tions. 


E 506.1 Potable Watering Stations. A potable watering 
station, where provided for filling recreational vehicle potable 
water tanks, shall be located not less than 50 feet (15 240 mm) 
from a sanitary disposal station. Where such is provided, adja- 
cent to the potable water outlet there shall be a posted sign of 
durable material not less than 2 feet by 2 feet (610 mm by 
610 mm) in size. Inscribed thereon in clear, legible letters on 
a contrasting background shall be: 
“POTABLE WATER. NOT TO BE USED FOR FLUSHING 
WASTE TANKS." 

The potable water shall be protected from backflow 
using a listed vacuum breaker located downstream from the 
last shutoff valve. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX E 


415 


416 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX F - FIREFIGHTER BREATHING AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 417 


418 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX F 
FIREFIGHTER BREATHING AIR REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


F 101.0 General. 


F 101.1 Applicability. This chapter covers minimum 
requirements for the installation of firefighter breathing air 
replenishment systems. 


F 201.0 Definitions. 


| F 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 
High-Rise Building. A building where the floor of an occu- 
piable story is greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm) above the 
lowest level of fire department vehicle access. [NFPA 
5000:3.3.68.10] 
Interior Cylinder Fill Panels. Lockable interior panels that 
provide firefighters the ability to regulate breathing air pres- 
sure and refill self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA) 
cylinders. 
Interior Cylinder Fill Stations and Enclosures. Free- 
standing fill containment stations that provide firefighters the 
ability to regulate breathing air pressure and refill SCBA 
cylinders. 
Open-Circuit Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus. 
An SCBA in which exhalation is vented to the atmosphere 
and not rebreathed. [NFPA 1981:3.3.34] 
Self-Contained Breathing Apparatus (SCBA). An 
atmosphere-supplying respirator that supplies a respirable air 
atmosphere to the user from a breathing air source that 1s 


independent of the ambient environment and designed to be 
carried by the user. [NFPA 1981:3.3.46] 


For this appendix, where this term is used without a qual- 

ifier, it indicates an open-circuit self-contained breathing 
apparatus or combination SCBA/SARs. For this appendix, 
combination SCBA/SARs are encompassed by the terms self- 
contained breathing apparatus or SCBA. 
Welding Procedure Specification (WPS). A written 
qualified welding procedure prepared to provide direction for 
making production welds to code requirements. [ASME 
B31.1:100.2] 


F 301.0 System Components. 


F 301.1 General. Firefighter breathing air replenishment 
systems shall contain, as a minimum, the following compo- 
nents: 


(1) Exterior fire department connection panel 

(2) Interior fire department air fill panel or station 
(3) Interconnected piping distribution system 

(4) Pressure monitoring switch 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


F 401.0 Required Installations. 


F 401.1 General. A firefighter air system shall be installed 

in the following buildings: 

(1) High-rise buildings. 

(2) Underground structures that are three or more floors 
below grade with an area greater than 20 000 square feet 
(1858 m°). 

(3) Large area structures with an area greater than 200 000 
square feet (18 580 m?) and where the travel distance 
from the building centerline to the closest exit 1s greater 
than 500 feet (152 m), such as warehouses, manufactur- 
ing complexes, malls, or convention centers. 


(4) Underground transportation or pedestrian tunnels 
exceeding 500 feet (152 m) in length. 


F 501.0 Exterior Fire Department Connection Panel 
and Enclosure. 


F 501.1 Purpose. The exterior fire department connection 
panel shall provide the fire department's mobile air operator 
access to the system and shall be compatible with the fire 
department's mobile air unit. 

F 501.2 Number of Panels. Each building or structure 
shall have a minimum of two panels. 


F 501.3 Location. Each panel shall be attached to the build- 
ing or on a remote monument at the exterior of the building 
with a minimum 6 foot (1829 mm) radius and 180-degree 
(3.14 rad) clear, unobstructed access to the front ofthe panel. 
The panel shall be weather-resistant or secured inside of a 
weather-resistant enclosure. The panel shall be located on 
opposite sides of the building within 50 feet (15 240 mm) of 
an approved roadway or driveway, or other locations 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


F 501.4 Construction. The fire department connection 
panel shall be installed in a metal cabinet constructed of not 
less than 18-gauge carbon steel or equivalent. The cabinet 
shall be provided with a coating or other means to protect the 
cabinet from corrosion. 

F 501.5 Vehicle Protection. Where the panel is located in 
an area subject to vehicle traffic, impact protection shall be 
provided. 

F 501.6 Enclosure Marking. The front of the enclosure 
shall be marked, *FIREFIGHTER AIR SYSTEM." The let- 
tering shall be in a color that contrasts with the enclosure front 
and in letters that are not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high with 
a % of an inch (9.5 mm) brush stroke. 

F 501.7 Enclosure Components. The exterior fire depart- 
ment connection panel shall contain the necessary gauges, 
isolation valves, pressure-relief valves, pressure-regulating 
valves, check valves, tubing, fittings, supports, connectors, 
adapters, and other necessary components as required to 


419 


APPENDIX F 


allow the fire department's mobile air unit to connect and 
augment the system with a constant source of breathing air. 
Each fire department connection panel shall contain not less 
than two inlet air connections. 


F 501.8 Pressure-Relief Valve. Pressure-relief valves shall 
be installed downstream of the pressure regulator inlet. The 
relief valve shall meet the requirements of CGA S-1.3 and 
shall not be field adjustable. The relief valve shall have a set- 
to-open pressure not exceeding 1.1 times the design pressure 
of the system. Pressure-relief valve discharge shall terminate 
so that the exhaust air stream cannot impinge upon personnel 
in the area. Valves, plugs, or caps shall not be installed in the 
discharge of a pressure-relief valve. Where discharge piping 
is used, the end shall not be threaded. 


F 501.9 Security. The fire department connection panel 
enclosure shall be locked by an approved means. 


F 601.0 Interior Cylinder Fill Panels. 


F 601.1 Cabinet Requirements. Each cylinder fill panel 
shall be installed in a metal cabinet constructed of not less 
than 18-gauge carbon steel or equivalent. The depth of the 
cabinet shall not create an exit obstruction where installed in 
building stairwells. Except for the shutoff valve, pressure 
gauges, fill hoses and ancillary components; no system com- 
ponents shall be visible and shall be contained behind a not 
less than an 18-gauge interior panel. 


F 601.2 Clearance and Access. The panel shall be located 
not less than 36 inches (914 mm) but not more than 60 inches 
(1524 mm) above the finished floor or a stairway landing. 
Clear, unobstructed access shall be provided to each panel. 


F 601.3 Door. The door shall be arranged such that where the 
door is open, it does not reduce the required exit width or cre- 
ate an obstruction in the path of egress. 


F 601.4 Cabinet Marking. The front of each cylinder fill 
panel shall be marked, *FIREFIGHTER AIR SYSTEM." The 
lettering shall be in a color that contrasts with the cabinet front 
and in letters that are not less than 2 inches (51 mm) high with 
a % of an inch (9.5 mm) brush stroke. 


F 601.5 Cabinet Components. The cabinet shall be of a 
size to allow for the installation ofthe components in Section 
F 601.5.1. 


F 601.5.1 Cylinder Fill Panel. The cylinder fill panel 
shall contain the gauges, isolation valves, pressure-relief 
valves, pressure-regulating valves, check valves, tubing, 
fittings, supports, connectors, hoses, adapters, and other 
components to refill SCBA cylinders. 


F 601.6 Cylinder Filling Hose. The design of the cabinet 
shall provide a means for storing the hose to prevent kinking. 
Where the hose is coiled, the brackets shall be installed so 
that the hose bend radius is maintained at 4 inches (102 mm) 
or greater. Fill hose connectors for connection to SCBA cylin- 
ders shall comply with the requirements of CGA V-1, num- 
ber 346 or 347. No other SCBA cylinder fill connections shall 
be permitted. 


F 601.7 Security. Each panel cover shall be maintained and 
locked by an approved means. 


420 


F 701.0 Interior Cylinder Fill Stations and Enclo- 
sures. 


F 701.1 Location. The location of the closet or room for 
each air fill station shall be approved by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. Where approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, space shall be permitted to be utilized for other 
firefighting purposes. The door to each room enclosing the 
air filling station enclosure shall be readily accessible at all 
times. Not less than a 6 foot (1829 mm) radius and 180- 
degree (3.14 rad) clear, unobstructed access to the front of the 
air filling station shall be provided. The enclosure shall have 
emergency lighting installed in accordance with NFPA 70. 


F 701.2 Security. Each air fill station shall be installed 
within a lockable enclosure, closet, or room by an approved 
means. Access to fill equipment and controls shall be 
restricted to authorized personnel by key or other means. 


F 701.3 Components. The air fill station shall contain the 
gauges, isolation valves, pressure-relief valves, pressure-reg- 
ulating valves, check valves, tubing, fittings, supports, con- 
nectors, hoses, adapters, and other components to refill SCBA 
cylinders. 


F 701.4 Cylinder Filling Hose. Where hoses are used, the 
design of the cabinet shall provide a means for storing the 
hose to prevent kinking. Where the hose is coiled, the brack- 
ets shall be installed so that the hose bend radius is maintained 
at 4 inches (102 mm) or greater. Fill hose connectors for con- 
nection to SCBA cylinders shall comply with the require- 
ments of CGA V-1, no. 346 or 347. For high-pressure SCBA 
cylinders of 4500 pounds-force per square inch (psi) (31 026 
kPa), no. 347 connectors shall be used. For low-pressure 
SCBA cylinders of 3000 psi (20 684 kPa) and 2200 psi (15 
168 kPa), no. 346 connectors shall be used. No other SCBA 
cylinder fill connections shall be permitted. 


F 701.5 Enclosure and Air Filling Station Marking. 
Each enclosure, closet, or room shall be marked, “FIRE- 
FIGHTERS AIR SYSTEM.” The lettering shall be in a color 
that contrasts with the cabinet front and in letters that are not 
less than 2 inches (51 mm) high with a % of an inch (9.5 mm) 
brush stroke. 


F 801.0 Materials. 


F 801.1 General. Pressurized components shall be compat- 
ible for use with high-pressure breathing air equipment and 
self-contained breathing air apparatus. Pressurized breathing 
air components shall be rated for not less than a working pres- 
sure of 5000 psi (34 474 kPa). 


F 801.2 Tubing. Tubing shall be stainless steel in accordance 
with ASTM A269, or other approved materials that are com- 
patible with breathing air at the system pressure. Routing of 
tubing and bends shall be such as to protect the tubing from 
mechanical damage. 

F 801.3 Fittings. Fittings shall be constructed of stainless steel 
in accordance with ASTM A479, or other approved materials 
that are compatible with breathing air at the system pressure. 
F 801.4 Prohibited Materials. The use of nonmetallic 
materials, carbon steel, iron pipe, malleable iron, high- 
strength gray iron, or alloy steel shall be prohibited for breath- 
ing air pipe and tubing materials. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


F 801.5 Pressure Monitoring Switch. An electric low- 
pressure monitoring switch shall be installed in the piping 
system to monitor the air pressure. The pressure switch shall 
transmit a supervisory signal to the central alarm monitoring 
station where the pressure of the breathing air system is less 
than 80 percent of the system operating pressure. Activation 
of the pressure switch shall also activate an audible alarm and 
visual strobe located at the building annunciator panel. A 
weather-resistant sign shall be provided in conjunction with 
the audible alarm stating, “FIREFIGHTER AIR SYSTEM - 
LOW AIR PRESSURE ALARM." Where not part of a build- 
ing annunciator panel, the lettering shall be in a contrasting 
color, and the letters shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) 
high with a % of an inch (9.5 mm) brush stroke. 


F 801.6 Isolation Valve. A system isolation valve shall be 
installed downstream of each air fill station and shall be 
located in the panel or within 3 feet (914 mm) of the station. 
The isolation valve shall be marked with its function in letters 
that are not less than 74e of an inch (4.8 mm) high with a 46 
of an inch (1.6 mm) brush stroke. 


F 901.0 System Requirements. 


F 901.1 Protection. Components of the firefighter breath- 
ing air replenishment system installed in a building or struc- 
ture shall be protected by not less than a 2-hour fire-resistive 
construction. Components shall be protected from physical 
damage. 


F 901.2 Markings. Components shall be clearly identified 
using stainless steel or plastic labels or tags indicating their 
function. This shall include not less than all fire department 
connection panels, air fill stations, air storage system, gauges, 
valves, air connections, air outlets, enclosures, and doors. 


F 901.3 Tubing Markings. Tubing shall be clearly marked, 
“FIREFIGHTERS AIR SYSTEM" and “HIGH-PRESSURE 
BREATHING AIR" using signs or self-adhesive labels. Signs 
shall be | inch (25.4 mm) high and shall be secured to the 
tubing. Signs shall be made of copper alloy, stainless steel, 
or plastic and engraved with % of an inch (9.5 mm) letters 
with a “cof an inch (1.6 mm) stroke lettering. Signs or labels 
shall be placed at not less than 20 foot (6096 mm) intervals 
and at each fitting, whether the tubing is concealed or in plain 
view. Tubing shall have a sign or label at an accessible point. 


F 901.4 Support. Pipe and tubing shall be supported at 
intervals not less than that shown in Table 313.3 of this code. 
Pipe and tubing shall be supported in accordance with Section 
313.0 of this code. 


F 1001.0 Design Criteria. 


F 1001.1 Fill Time. The system shall be designed to fill, at 
the most remote fill station or panel, not less than two 66 
cubic foot (ft?) (1.87 m?) compressed breathing air cylinders 
to a pressure not to exceed 4500 psi (31 026 kPa) simultane- 
ously in 3 minutes or less. Where greater capacity is required, 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction shall specify the required 
system capacity. 

F 1001.2 Fill Panels or Stations Location. Cylinder fill 
panels or stations shall be installed in the interior of buildings in 
accordance with Section F 1001.2.1 through Section F 1001.2.3. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX F 


F 1001.2.1 High-Rise Buildings. An interior cylin- 
der fill panel or station shall be installed commencing on 
the third floor and every third floor thereafter above 
grade. For underground floors in buildings with more 
than five underground floors, an interior cylinder fill 
panel or station shall be installed commencing on the 
third floor below grade and every three floors below 
grade thereafter, except for the bottom-most floor. 


F 1001.2.2 Underground Structures. For under- 
ground floors in buildings with more than five under- 
ground floors, an interior cylinder fill panel or station 
shall be installed commencing on the third floor below 
grade and every three floors below grade thereafter, 
except for the bottom-most floor. 


F 1001.2.3 Installation Locations. The specific loca- 
tion or locations on each floor shall be approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


F 1101.0 System Assembly Requirements. 


F 1101.1 General. The system shall be an all-welded system 
except where the tubing joints are readily accessible and at 
the individual air fill panels or stations. Where mechanical 
high-pressure tube fittings are used, they shall be approved 
for the type of materials to be joined and rated for the maxi- 
mum pressure of the system. 


F 1101.2 Welding Requirements. Prior to and during the 
welding of sections of tubing, a continuous, regulated dry 
nitrogen or argon purge at 3 psi (21 kPa) shall be maintained 
to eliminate contamination with products of the oxidation or 
welding flux. The purge shall commence not less than 2 min- 
utes prior to welding operations and continue until the welded 
joint is at ambient temperature. Welding procedures shall 
comply with the following requirements: 


(1) Qualification of the WPS to be used, and of the per- 
formance of welders and operators, is required and shall 
comply with the requirements of ASME B31.1. 


(2) No welding shall be done if there is impingement of rain, 
snow, sleet, or high wind on the weld area. 


(3) Tack welds permitted to remain in the finished weld shall 
be made by a qualified welder. Tack welds made by an 
unqualified welder shall be removed. Tack welds that 
remain shall be made with an electrode and WPS that is | 
the same as or equivalent to the electrode and WPS to be 
used for the first pass. The stopping and starting ends 
shall be prepared by grinding or other means so that they 
can be satisfactorily incorporated into the final weld. | 
Tack welds that have cracked shall be removed. 


(4) Arc strikes outside the area of the intended weld shall be 
avoided on a base metal. Arc strikes made outside of the 
weld joint area shall be removed and the surface visually 
examined. The surface shall also be examined by the liq- 
uid penetrant or magnetic particle method when the 
material is P-No. 4, P-No. 5A, P-No. 5B, or P-No. 15E. 
[ASME B31.1:127.4.1] 


F 1101.3 Prevention of Contamination. The system 
components shall not be exposed to contaminants, including 
but not limited to, oils, solvents, dirt, and construction mate- 


421 


APPENDIX F 


rials. Where contamination of system components has 
occurred, the affected component shall not be installed in the 
system. 


F 1201.0 System Acceptance and Certification. 


F 1201.1 Static Pressure Testing. Following fabrication, 
assembly, and installation of the piping distribution system, 
exterior connection panel, and interior cylinder fill panels, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall witness the pneumatic 
testing of the complete system at a test pressure of not less 
than 7500 psi (51 711 kPa) using oil-free dry air, nitrogen, or 
argon. À pneumatic test of not less than 24 hours shall be per- 
formed. During this test, all fittings, joints, and system com- 
ponents shall be inspected for leaks. A solution compatible 
with the system component materials shall be used on each 
joint and fitting. Defects in the system or leaks detected shall 
be documented on an inspection report, repaired or replaced. 
As an alternate, a pressure-decay test in accordance with 
ASME B31.3 shall be permitted. 


F 1201.2 Low-Pressure Switch Test. Upon successful 
completion of the 24-hour static pressure test, the system's 
low-pressure monitoring switch shall be calibrated to not less 
than 3000 psi (20 684 kPa) descending, and tested to verify 
that the signal is annunciated at the building's main fire alarm 
panel and by means of an audible alarm and visual strobe 
located in a visible location. 


F 1201.3 Compatibility Check. Each air fill panel and sta- 
tion, and each exterior fire department connection panel shall 
be tested for compatibility with the fire department's SCBA 
fill fittings. 


F 1201.4 Material Certifications. The pipe or tubing mate- 
rial certifications shall be provided to the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


F 1201.5 Air Sampling. Before the system is placed into 
service, a minimum of two samples shall be taken from sep- 
arate air fill panels and submitted to an independent certified 
gas analysis laboratory to verify the system’s cleanliness and 
that the air is in accordance with the following requirements 
for breathing air: 


(1) Breathing air shall have oxygen content not less than 
19.5 percent and not greater than 23.5 percent by vol- 
ume. 


(2) Breathing air shall not have a concentration of carbon 
monoxide exceeding 5.0 parts per million (ppm) by vol- 
ume. 


(3) Breathing air shall not have a concentration of carbon 
dioxide exceeding 1000 ppm by volume. 


(4) Breathing air shall not have a concentration of condensed 
oil and particulate exceeding 7.2 E-11 pounds per cubic 
inch (Ib/in?) (2.0 mg/m?) at 72°F (22°C) and 30 in Hg 
(102 kPa). 

(5) Where breathing air supply for respirators 1s stored at 
pressures exceeding 15 bars (1500 kPa), the breathing air 
shall not have a concentration of water exceeding 24 ppm 
by volume. 


422 


(6) Breathing air shall not have a nonmethane volatile 
organic compound (VOC) content exceeding 25 ppm as 
methane equivalents. 


(7) Breathing air shall not have a pronounced or unusual 
odor. 


(8) Breathing air shall have a concentration of nitrogen not 
less than 75 percent and not more than 81 percent. 
[NFPA 1989:5.6] 


The written report of the analysis shall be submitted to 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction, documenting that the 
breathing air is in accordance with this section. 


F 1201.5.1 Air Quality Analysis. During the period 
of air quality analysis, the air fill panel inlet shall be 
secured so that no air is capable of being introduced into 
the system and each air fill panel shall be provided with 
a sign stating, “AIR QUALITY ANALYSIS IN 
PROGRESS, DO NOT FILL OR USE ANY AIR FROM 
THIS SYSTEM.” This sign shall be not less than 8^ 
inches (216 mm) by 11 inches (279 mm) with not less 
than 1 inch (25.4 mm) lettering. 


F 1201.6 Annual Air Sampling. The breathing air within 
the system shall be sampled and certified annually and 
inspected in accordance with the procedure in Section F 
1201.5. 


F 1201.7 Final Proof Test. The Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion shall witness the filling of two empty 66 cubic foot (ft?) 
(1.87 m?) capacity SCBA cylinders in 3 minutes or less, using 
compressed air supplied by fire department equipment con- 
nected to the exterior fire department connection panel. The 
SCBA cylinders shall be filled at the air fill panel or station 
farthest from the exterior fire department connection panel. 
Following this, not less than two air samples shall then be 
taken from separate air filling stations and submitted to an 
independent certified gas analyst laboratory to verify the sys- 
tem's cleanliness and that the air is in accordance with the 
requirements of NFPA 1989. The written report shall be pro- 
vided to the Authority Having Jurisdiction certifying that the 
air analysis is in accordance with the above requirements. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 


APPENDIX G - SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS 


(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
2 |1-AC | AC SS | SS/CC 172 1314 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


423 


424 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX G 
SIZING OF VENTING SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


G 101.0 General. 


G 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides general 
guidelines for sizing venting systems serving appliances 
equipped with draft hoods, Category I appliances, and appli- 
ances listed for use with Type B vents. 


Table 510.1.2(1) is used when sizing a Type B double-wall gas vent con- 
nected directly to the appliance. 


Note: The appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 
FIGURE G 101.2(1) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE 
APPLIANCE WITH A TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(a)] 


Vent cap 


Type B 
double-wall 
gas vent 


I—. 


Single-wall 
vent connector 


Table 510.1.2(2) is used when sizing a single-wall metal vent connector 
attached to a Type B double-wall gas vent. 


Note: The appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 
FIGURE G 101.2(2) 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE 
APPLIANCE WITH A SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTOR 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(b)] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


G 101.2 Examples Using Single Appliance Venting 
Tables. See Figure G 101.2(1) through Figure G 101.2(14). 
[NFPA 54:F.1] 


Tile-lined masonry 
chimney 


Type B double-wall 
gas vent used as 
connector 


Table 510.1.2(3) is used when sizing a Type B double-wall gas vent con- 
nector attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney. 


Notes: 
1. A is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner. 
2. The appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan-assisted 
type. 
FIGURE G 101.2(3) 

VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE WITH A 
MASONRY CHIMNEY AND ATYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT 
CONNECTOR 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(c)] 


Tile-lined masonry 
chimney 


Single-wall 
vent connector 


Table 510.1.2(4) is used when sizing a single-wall vent connector attached 
to a tile-lined masonry chimney. 


Notes: 

1. A is the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner. 

2. The appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan-assisted 

type. 
FIGURE G 101.2(4) 
VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE APPLIANCE 
USING A MASONRY CHIMNEY AND A SINGLE-WALL 
METAL VENT CONNECTOR 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(d)] 


425 


APPENDIX G 


Asbestos cement Type B or single-wall metal vent serving 
a single draft hood-equipped appliance. [See Table 510.1.2(5)] 


FIGURE G 101.2(5) 

ASBESTOS CEMENT TYPE B OR SINGLE-WALL 
METAL VENT SYSTEM SERVING A SINGLE 
DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCE 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(e)] 


Type B double-wall 
common vent 


double-wall 
gas vent used 
as connectors 


Table 510.2(1) is used when sizing Type B double-wall gas vent connectors 
attached to a Type B double-wall common vent. 


Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 


FIGURE G 101.2(6) 

VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES WITH 
TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL 
VENT CONNECTORS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(f)] 


426 


Type B double-wall 
common vent 


Connector 


Single-wall vent 
connectors 


Table 510.2(2) is used when sizing single-wall vent connectors attached to 
a Type B double-wall common vent. 


Note: Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 


FIGURE G 101.2(7) 

VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES 
WITH TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT AND SINGLE-WALL METAL 
VENT CONNECTORS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(g)] 


| Tile-lined masonry 
Type B chimney 
double-wall 
gas vent 
H used as 
connectors 


ji 
Mn" 


Table 510.2(3) is used when sizing Type B double-wall vent connectors 
attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney. 


Notes: 

l. Ais the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner. 

2. Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 


FIGURE G 101.2(8) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES 
WITH TYPE B DOUBLE-WALL VENT CONNECTORS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(h)] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Tile-lined masonry 
chimney 


Single-wall vent 


H connector 


Connector 
rise В 


Table 510.2(4) is used when sizing single-wall metal vent connectors 
attached to a tile-lined masonry chimney. 


Notes: 

l. Ais the equivalent cross-sectional area of the tile liner. 

2. Each appliance can be either Category I draft hood-equipped or fan- 
assisted type. 


FIGURE G 101.2(9) 
MASONRY CHIMNEY SERVING TWO OR MORE APPLIANCES 
WITH SINGLE-WALL METAL VENT CONNECTORS 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(i)] 


See Section 510.2.4 


Asbestos cement Type B or single-wall metal pipe vent serving two or more 
draft hood-equipped appliances. [See Table 510.2(5)] 


FIGURE G 101.2(10) 

ASBESTOS CEMENT TYPE B OR SINGLE-WALL 
METAL VENT SYSTEM SERVING TWO OR MORE 
DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCES 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(j)] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX G 


Example: Manifolded common vent connector LM can be no greater than 18 
times the common vent connector manifold inside diameter; that is, a 4 inch 
(102 mm) inside diameter common vent connector manifold should not 
exceed 72 inches (1829 mm) in length. [See Section 510.2.3] 


Note: This is an illustration of a typical manifolded vent connector. Differ- 
ent appliance, vent connector, or common vent types are possible. [See Sec- 
tion 510.2] 


FIGURE G 101.2(11) 
USE OF MANIFOLDED COMMON VENT CONNECTOR 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(k)] 


See Section 510.2.4 


Common vent 
H 


Example: Offset common vent 


Note: This is an illustration of a typical offset vent. Different appliance, vent 
connector, or vent types are possible. [See Section 510.1 and Section 510.2] 


FIGURE G 101.2(12) 


USE OF OFFSET COMMON VENT 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(I)] 


427 


APPENDIX G 


Tee same size as 
segment above 


Vent connector Tee 


Common vent size 
based on all inputs 
entering this segment 


and available total height : 
Available total 
height H equals 
rise plus distance 


Total input between tees 


Tee same 
size as 
segment 
above 


Increase vent 
connector | 


Btu/hr [size if 


input jnecessary ცხი, inputs 


from below 
Vent connector size Common vent size 
depends on: depends on: 
* Input * Combined inputs 
• Rise * Available total height H 
* Available total height H * Table 510.2(1) 
* Table 510.2(1) common vent 


connectors 


FIGURE G 101.2(13) 
MULTISTORY GAS VENT DESIGN PROCEDURE 
FOR EACH SEGMENT OF SYSTEM 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(m)] 


G 101.3 Example 1: Single Draft Hood-Equipped 
Appliance. An installer has a 120 000 British thermal units 
per hour (Btu/h) (35 kW) input appliance with a 5 inch (127 
mm) diameter draft hood outlet that needs to be vented into a 
10 foot (3048 mm) high Type B vent system. What size vent 
shall be used assuming: (1) a 5 foot (1524 mm) lateral sin- 
gle-wall metal vent connector is used with two 90 degree 
(1.57 rad) elbows or (2) a 5 foot (1524 mm) lateral single- 
wall metal vent connector is used with three 90 degree (1.57 
rad) elbows in the vent system? (See Figure G 101.3) 


Solution: 

Table 510.1.2(2) should be used to solve this problem because 

single-wall metal vent connectors are being used with a Type 

B vent, as follows: 

(1) Read down the first column in Table 510.1.2(2) until the 
row associated with a 10 foot (3048 mm) height and 5 
foot (1524 mm) lateral is found. Read across this row 
until a vent capacity greater than 120 000 Btu/h (35 kW) 
is located in the shaded columns labeled NAT Max for 
draft hood-equipped appliances. In this case, a 5 inch (127 


428 


Use individual vent for top-floor Use available total 
appliance if connector height for top-floor 


requirement for rise or total ჯ appliance and 
height cannot be met Liesl сар combined input of 
— all appliances on 
DA common vent 
$ 
i! Available total 
I) height for top- 
Use vent |! floor appliance – Third interconnection tee* 


appliance 


table —>(7 ^ Available total height 
for third-floor appliance 
and combined input of 
three appliances 

(If top-floor 

appliance is not 
connected, measure 
total height to vent top 
Second interconnection 
tee* 


Available total 
height for third- 
floor appliance 


Use vent 

Er Use available total 

айе height for second-floor 

Available total appliance and combined 
Third-floor height for second-| | heat input of two 
appliance floor appliance appliances 
First interconnection tee* 
Use vent 


Design vent connector for 
first-floor appliance as an 
individual vent of this total 
height for input of first- 
floor appliance 


| 


* Each interconnection tee is same size as 
segment of common vent directly above 


Second-floor 
appliance 


Tee with cap optional 


First-floor 


FIGURE G 101.2(14) 


PRINCIPLES OF DESIGN OF MULTISTORY VENTS USING 


VENT CONNECTOR AND COMMON VENT DESIGN TABLES 


Q) 


[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1(n)] 


mm) diameter vent has a capacity of 122 000 Btu/h (35.7 
kW) and can be used for this application. 

If three 90 degree (1.57 rad) elbows are used in the vent 
system, the maximum vent capacity listed in the tables 
must be reduced by 10 percent. This implies that the 5 
inch (127 mm) diameter vent has an adjusted capacity of 
only 110 000 Btu/h (32 kW). In this case, the vent sys- 
tem must be increased to 6 inches (152 mm) in diameter. 
See the following calculations: 


122 000 Btu/h (35.7 kW) x 0.90 = 110 000 Btu/h (32 
kW) for 5 inch (127 mm) vent 


From Table 510.1.2(2), select 6 inch (152 mm) vent. 
186 000 Btu/h (54.5 kW) x 0.90 = 167 000 Btu/h (49 kW) 


This figure is greater than the required 120 000 Btu/h 
(35 kW). Therefore, use a 6 inch (152 mm) vent and con- 
nector where three elbows are used. [NFPA 54:F.1.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Elbow 


Single-wall 
connector 


Draft hood- 
equipped appliance 
120 000 Btu/h input 


For SI units: 1 foot — 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour — 
0.293 kW 
FIGURE G 101.3 
SINGLE DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED APPLIANCE - EXAMPLE 1 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1.1] 


G 101.4 Example 2: Single Fan-Assisted Appliance. 
An installer has an 80 000 Btu/h (23.4 kW) input fan-assisted 
appliance that must be installed using 10 feet (3048 mm) of 
lateral connector attached to a 30 foot high (9144 mm) Type 
B vent. Two 90-degree (1.57 rad) elbows are needed for the 
installation. Can a single-wall metal vent connector be used 
for this application? (See Figure G 101.4) 


Solution: 


Table 510.1.2(2) refers to the use of single-wall metal vent con- 
nectors with Type B vent. In the first column find the row asso- 
ciated with a 30 foot (9144 mm) height and a 10 foot (3048 
mm) lateral. Read across this row, looking at the FAN Min and 
FAN Max columns, to find that a 3 inch (76 mm) diameter sin- 
gle-wall metal vent connector is not recommended. Moving to 
the next larger size single-wall connector [4 inch (102 mm)] 
we find that a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter single-wall metal con- 
nector has a recommended minimum vent capacity of 91 000 
Btu/h (26.7 kW) and a recommended maximum vent capacity 
of 144 000 Btu/h (42.2 kW). The 80 000 Btu/h (23.4 kW) fan- 
assisted appliance is outside this range, so the conclusion is that 
a single-wall metal vent connector cannot be used to vent this 
appliance using 10 feet (3048 mm) of lateral for the connector. 


However, if the 80 000 Btu/h (23.4 kW) input appliance 
could be moved to within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the vertical vent, 
a4 inch (102 mm) single-wall metal connector could be used 
to vent the appliance. Table 510.1.2(2) shows the acceptable 
range of vent capacities for a 4 inch (102 mm) vent with 5 
feet (1524 mm) of lateral to be between 72 000 Btu/h (21.1 
kW) and 157 000 Btu/h (46 kW). 


If the appliance cannot be moved closer to the vertical 
vent, a Type B vent could be used as the connector material. 
In this case, Table 510.1.2(1) shows that, for a 30 foot (9144 
mm) high vent with 10 feet (3048 mm) of lateral, the accept- 
able range of vent capacities for a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter 
vent attached to a fan-assisted appliance 1s between 37 000 
Btu/h (10.8 kW) and 150 000 Btu/h (44 kW). [NFPA 54:F.1.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX G 


gas vent 


10 feet lateral 


Vent connector 


Fan-assisted appliance 
80 000-Btu/h input 


For SI units: 1 foot — 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour — 
0.293 kW 
FIGURE G 101.4 
SINGLE FAN-ASSISTED APPLIANCE - EXAMPLE 2 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.1.2] 


G 101.5 Example 3: Interpolating Between Table Val- 
ues. An installer has an 80 000 Btu/h (23.4 kW) input appli- 
ance with a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter draft hood outlet that 
needs to be vented into a 12 foot (3658 mm) high Type B 
vent. The vent connector has a 5 foot (1524 mm) lateral 
length and is also Type B. Can this appliance be vented using 
a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter vent? 


Solution: 


Table 510.1.2(1) is used in the case of an all Type B Vent sys- 
tem. However, Table 510.1.2(1) does not have an entry for a 
height of 12 feet (3658 mm), and interpolation must be used. 
Read down the 4 inch (102 mm) diameter NAT Max column to 
the row associated with 10 foot (3048 mm) height and 5 foot 
(1524 mm) lateral to find the capacity value of 77 000 Btu/h 
(22.6 kW). Read further down to the 15 foot (4572 mm) height, 
5 foot (1524 mm) lateral row to find the capacity value of 87 000 
Btu/h (25.5 kW). The difference between the 15 foot (4572 mm) 
height capacity value and the 10 foot (3048 mm) height capac- 
ity value is 10 000 Btu/h (3 kW). The capacity for a vent sys- 
tem with a 12 foot (3658 mm) height is equal to the capacity 
for a 10 foot (3048 mm) height plus two-fifths of the difference 
between the 10 foot (3048 mm) and 15 foot (4572 mm) height 
values, or 77 000 Btu/h (22.6 kW) + % x 10 000 Btu/h (3 kW) 
— 81 000 Btu/h (23.7 kW). Therefore, a 4 inch (102 mm) diam- 
eter vent can be used in the installation. [NFPA 54:F.1.3] 

G 101.6 Example 4: Common Venting Two Draft 
Hood-Equipped Appliances. A 35 000 Btu/h (10.3 kW) 
water heater is to be common vented with a 150 000 Btu/h 
(44 kW) furnace, using a common vent with a total height of 
30 feet (9144 mm). The connector rise is 2 feet (610 mm) for 
the water heater with a horizontal length of 4 feet (1219 mm). 
The connector rise for the furnace is 3 feet (914 mm) with a 


429 


APPENDIX G 


horizontal length of 8 feet (2438 mm). Assume single-wall 
metal connectors will be used with Type B vent. What size 
connectors and combined vent should be used in this instal- 
lation? (See Figure G 101.6) 


Solution: 


Table 510.2(2) should be used to size single-wall metal vent 
connectors attached to Type B vertical vents. In the vent con- 
nector capacity portion of Table 510.2(2), find the row asso- 
ciated with a 30 foot (9144 mm) vent height. For a 2 foot 
(610 mm) rise on the vent connector for the water heater, 
read the shaded columns for draft hood-equipped appliances 
to find that a 3 inch (76 mm) diameter vent connector has a 
capacity of 37 000 Btu/h (10.8 kW). Therefore, a 3 inch (76 
mm) single-wall metal vent connector can be used with the 
water heater. For a draft hood-equipped furnace with a 3 foot 
(914 mm) rise, read across the appropriate row to find that a 
5 inch (127 mm) diameter vent connector has a maximum 
capacity of 120 000 Btu/h (35 kW) (which is too small for 
the furnace) and a 6 inch (152 mm) diameter vent connector 
has a maximum vent capacity of 172 000 Btu/h (50 kW). 
Therefore, a 6 inch (152 mm) diameter vent connector should 
be used with the 150 000 Btu/h (44 kW) furnace. Because 
both vent connector, horizontal lengths are less than the max- 
imum lengths listed in Section 510.2.1; the table values can 
be used without adjustments. 


In the common vent capacity portion of Table 510.2(2), 
find the row associated with a 30 foot (9144 mm) vent height 
and read over to the NAT + NAT portion of the 6 inch (152 
mm) diameter column to find a maximum combined capac- 
ity of 257 000 Btu/h (75 kW). Since the two appliances total 
only 185 000 Btu/h (54 kW), a 6 inch (152 mm) common vent 
can be used. [NFPA 54:F 2.1] 


Combined capacity 
35 000 + 150 000 = 
185 000 Btu/h 


Type B double- 


wall gas vent 
2 feet Single-wall 
connectors 


Draft hood- 

equipped Draft hood- 
water heater equipped furnace 
35 000 Btu/h 150 000 Btu/h 


input input 


For SI units: 1 foot — 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour — 
0.293 kW 
FIGURE G 101.6 
COMMON VENTING TWO DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED 
APPLIANCES - EXAMPLE 4 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.2.1] 


430 


G 101.7 Example 5(a): Common Venting a Draft 
Hood-Equipped Water Heater with a Fan-Assisted 
Furnace into a Type B Vent. In this case, a 35 000 Btu/h 
(10.3 kW) input draft hood-equipped water heater with a 4 
inch (102 mm) diameter draft hood outlet, 2 feet (610 mm) of 
connector rise, and 4 feet (1219 mm) of horizontal length is 
to be common vented with a 100 000 Btu/h (29 kW) fan- 
assisted furnace with a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter flue collar, 
3 feet (914 mm) of connector rise, and 6 feet (1829 mm) of 
horizontal length. The common vent consists of a 30 foot 
(9144 mm) height of Type B vent. What are the recom- 
mended vent diameters for each connector and the common 
vent? The installer would like to use a single-wall metal vent 
connector. (See Figure G 101.7) 


Solution: 


Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Since the water 
heater vent connector, horizontal length of 4 feet (1219 mm) 
is less than the maximum value listed in Table 510.2(2), the 
venting table values can be used without adjustments. Using 
the Vent Connector Capacity portion of Table 510.2(2), read 
down the Total Vent Height (А) column to 30 feet (9144 mm) 
and read across the 2 feet (610 mm) Connector Rise (R) row 
to the first Btu/h rating in the NAT Max column that is equal 
to or greater than the water heater input rating. The table 
shows that a 3 inch (76 mm) vent connector has a maximum 
input rating of 37 000 Btu/h (10.8 kW). Although this rating 
is greater than the water heater input rating, a 3 inch (76 mm) 
vent connector is prohibited by Section 510.2.18. A 4 inch 
(102 mm) vent connector has a maximum input rating of 67 
000 Btu/h (19.6 kW) and is equal to the draft hood outlet 
diameter. A 4 inch (102 mm) vent connector is selected. Since 
the water heater is equipped with a draft hood, there are no 
minimum input rating restrictions. 


LL Type B 
| double-wall 


gas vent 


Combined capacity 
35 000 + 100 000 = 
135 000 Btu/h 


30 feet 


Single-wall 
connectors 


Water heater 
35 000 Btu/h 
input 


Fan-assisted furnace 
100 000 Btu/h input 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 
0.293 kW 
FIGURE G 101.7 
COMMON VENTING A DRAFT HOOD-EQUIPPED WATER 
HEATER WITH A FAN-ASSISTED FURNACE INTO ATYPE B 
DOUBLE-WALL COMMON VENT - EXAMPLE 5(а) 
[NFPA 54: FIGURE F.2.2] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using the Vent Con- 
nector Capacity portion of Table 510.2(2), read down the 
Total Vent Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm) and 
across the 3 feet (914 mm) Connector Rise (R) row. Because 
the furnace has a fan-assisted combustion system, find the 
first FAN Max column with a Btu/h rating greater than the 
furnace input rating. The 4 inch (102 mm) vent connector has 
a maximum input rating of 119 000 Btu/h (34.9 kW) and a 
minimum input rating of 85 000 Btu/h (24.9 kW). 


The 100 000 Btu/h (29 kW) furnace in this example falls 
within this range, so a 4 inch (102 mm) connector is adequate. 
Because the furnace vent connector horizontal length of 6 feet 
(1829 mm) is less than the maximum value listed in Section 
510.2.1; the venting table values can be used without adjust- 
ment. If the furnace had an input rating of 80 000 Btu/h (23.4 
kW), a Type B vent connector would be needed in order to 
meet the minimum capacity limit. 


Common Vent Diameter. The total input to the common 
vent is 135 000 Btu/h (40 kW). Using the Common Vent 
Capacity portion of Table 510.2(2), read down the Total Vent 
Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm) and across this row 
to find the smallest vent diameter in the FAN + NAT column 
that has a Btu/h rating equal to or greater than 135 000 Btu/h 
(40 kW). The 4 inch (102 mm) common vent has a capacity of 
132 000 Btu/h (39 kW) and the 5 inch (127 mm) common vent 
has a capacity of 202 000 Btu/h (59 kW). Therefore, the 5 inch 
(127 mm) common vent should be used in this example. 


Summary: In this example, the installer can use a 4 inch (102 
mm) diameter, single-wall metal vent connector for the water 
heater and a 4 inch (102 mm) diameter, single-wall metal vent 
connector for the furnace. The common vent should be a 5 
inch (127 mm) diameter Type B vent. [NFPA 54:F.2.2] 


G 101.8 Example 5(b): Common Venting into an Inte- 
rior Masonry Chimney. In this case, the water heater and 
fan-assisted furnace of Example 5(a) are to be common- 
vented into a clay-tile-lined masonry chimney with a 30 foot 
(9144 mm) height. The chimney is not exposed to the out- 
doors below the roof line. The internal dimensions of the clay 
tile liner are nominally 8 inches (203 mm) by 12 inches (305 
mm). Assuming the same vent connector heights, laterals, and 
materials found in Example 5(a), what are the recommended 
vent connector diameters, and is this an acceptable installa- 
tion? 


Solution: 


Table 510.2(4) is used to size common venting installations 
involving single-wall connectors into masonry chimneys. 


Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 
510.2(4), Vent Connector Capacity, read down the Total Vent 
Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm), and read across the 
2 feet (610 mm) Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu/h rat- 
ing in the NAT Max column that is equal to or greater than the 
water heater input rating. The table shows that a 3 inch (76 
mm) vent connector has a maximum input of only 31 000 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX G 


Btu/h (9 kW), while a 4 inch (102 mm) vent connector has a 
maximum input of 57 000 Btu/h (16.7 kW). A 4 inch (102 
mm) vent connector must therefore be used. 


Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using the Vent Con- 
nector Capacity portion of Table 510.2(4), read down the 
Total Vent Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm) and 
across the 3 feet (914 mm) Connector Rise (R) row. Because 
the furnace has a fan-assisted combustion system, find the 
first FAN Max column with a Btu/h rating greater than the 
furnace input rating. The 4 inch (102 mm) vent connector has 
a maximum input rating of 127 000 Btu/h (37 kW) and a min- 
imum input rating of 95 000 Btu/h (27.8 kW). The 100 000 
Btu/h (29 kW) furnace in this example falls within this range, 
so a 4 inch (102 mm) connector is adequate. 


Masonry Chimney. From Table G 101.8, the equivalent 
area for a nominal liner size of 8 inches (203 mm) by 12 
inches (305 mm) is 63.6 square inches (0.041 m?). Using 
Table 510.2(4), Common Vent Capacity, read down the FAN 
+ NAT column under the Minimum Internal Area of Chim- 
ney value of 63 to the row for 30 foot (9144 mm) height to 
find a capacity value of 739 000 Btu/h (217 kW). The com- 
bined input rating of the furnace and water heater, 135 000 
Btu/h (40 kW), is less than the table value, so this is an 
acceptable installation. 


Subsection 510.2.17 requires the common vent area to 
be no greater than seven times the smallest listed appliance 
categorized vent area, flue collar area, or draft hood outlet 
area. Both appliances in this installation have 4 inch (102 
mm) diameter outlets. From Table G 101.8, the equivalent 
area for an inside diameter of 4 inches (102 mm) is 12.2 
square inches (0.008 m?). Seven times 12.2 equals 85.4, 
which is greater than 63.6, so this configuration is acceptable. 
[NFPA 54:F.2.3] 


G 101.9 Example 5(c): Common Venting into an Exte- 
rior Masonry Chimney. In this case, the water heater and 
fan-assisted furnace of Examples 5(a) and 5(b) are to be com- 
mon-vented into an exterior masonry chimney. The chimney 
height, clay-tile-liner dimensions, and vent connector heights 
and laterals are the same as in Example 5(b). This system is 
being installed in Charlotte, North Carolina. Does this exte- 
rior masonry chimney need to be relined? If so, what corru- 
gated metallic liner size is recommended? What vent 
connector diameters are recommended? (See Table G 101.8 
and Figure 510.1.10) 


Solution: 


According to Section 510.2.20, Type B vent connectors 
are required to be used with exterior masonry chimneys. Use 
Table 510.2(8) and Table 510.2(9) to size FAN+NAT com- 
mon venting installations involving Type B double-wall con- 
nectors into exterior masonry chimneys. 


The local 99 percent winter design temperature needed to 
use Table 510.2(8) and Table 510.2(9) can be found in 
ASHRAE Handbook — Fundamentals. For Charlotte, North 
Carolina, this design temperature is 19?F (-7.2?C). 


431 


APPENDIX G 


TABLE G 101.8 
MASONRY CHIMNEY LINER DIMENSIONS 
WITH CIRCULAR EQUIVALENTS* 
[NFPA 54: TABLE F.2.3] 


INSIDE INSIDE 
NOMINAL DIMENSIONS OF DIAMETER OR EQUIVALENT 
LINER SIZE LINER EQUIVALENT AREA 
(inches) А DIAMETER (square inches) 
(inches) А 
(іпсһеѕ) 
4.0 12.2 
5.0 19.6 
4х8 20х60 
6.0 28.3 
7.0 38.3 
7.4 42.7 
8x8 6/4 x 6% 
8.0 50.3 
9.0 63.6 
8x12 6% x 10% 
10.0 78.5 
10.4 83.3 
12x 12 934 x 9% 
11.0 95.0 
11.8 107.5 
12 x 16 9^ x 13% 12.0 113.0 
14.0 153.9 
14.5 162.9 
16x16 134 x 13% 
15.0 176.7 
16.2 206.1 
16 x 20 13x17 
18.0 254.4 
18.2 260.2 
20 x 20 16/2 x 16% 
20.0 314.1 
20.1 314.2 
20 x 24 16%%х 20% 
22.0 380.1 
22.1 380.1 
24 x 24 20% x 20% 
24.0 452.3 
24 x 28 20% x 24% 24.1 456.2 
26.4 543.3 
28 x 28 24И x 24% 
27.0 572.5 
27.9 607.0 
30 x 30 25% X 25% 
30.0 706.8 
30.9 749.9 
30 x 36 25^ x 31^ 
33.0 855.3 
34.4 929.4 
36 x 36 31/^x 31^ 
36.0 1017.9 


For SI units:1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square inch = 0.000645 m? 

* When liner sizes differ dimensionally from those shown in this table, 
equivalent diameters can be determined from published tables for square 
and rectangular ducts of equivalent carrying capacity or by other engi- 
neering methods. 


432 


Chimney Liner Requirement. As in Example 5(b), use 
the 63 square inches (0.04 m?) Internal Area columns for this 
size clay tile liner. Read down the 63 square inches (0.04 m?) 
column of Table 510.2(8) to the 30 foot (9144 mm) height 
row to find that the combined appliance maximum input is 
747 000 Btu/h (218.9 kW). The combined input rating of the 
appliances in this installation, 135 000 Btu/h (40 kW), is less 
than the maximum value, so this criterion is satisfied. Table 
510.2(9), at a 19?F (-7.2?C) design temperature, and at the 
same vent height and internal area used earlier, shows that 
the minimum allowable input rating of a space-heating appli- 
ance is 470 000 Btu/h (137.7 kW). The furnace input rating 
of 100 000 Btu/h (29 kW) is less than this minimum value. So 
this criterion 1s not satisfied, and an alternative venting design 
needs to be used, such as a Type B vent shown in Example 
5(a) or a listed chimney liner system shown in the remainder 
of the example. 


According to Section 510.2.19, Table 510.2(1) or Table 
510.2(2) is used for sizing corrugated metallic liners in 
masonry chimneys, with the maximum common vent capac- 
ities reduced by 20 percent. This example will be continued 
assuming Type B vent connectors. 


Water Heater Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 
510.2(1) Vent Connector Capacity, read down the total Vent 
Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm), and read across the 
2 feet (610 mm) Connector Rise (А) row to the first Btu/hour 
rating in the NAT Max column that is equal to or greater than 
the water heater input rating. The table shows that a 3 inch (76 
mm) vent connector has a maximum capacity of 39 000 Btu/h 
(11.4 kW). Although this rating is greater than the water 
heater input rating, a 3 inch (76 mm) vent connector is pro- 
hibited by Section 510.2.20. A 4 inch (102 mm) vent con- 
nector has a maximum input rating of 70 000 Btu/h (20.5 kW) 
and is equal to the draft hood outlet diameter. A 4 inch (102 
mm) vent connector is selected. 


Furnace Vent Connector Diameter. Using Table 
510.2(1), Vent Connector Capacity, read down the total Vent 
Height (Н) column to 30 feet (9144 mm), and read across the 
3 feet (914 mm) Connector Rise (R) row to the first Btu/h rat- 
ing in the FAN MAX column that is equal to or greater than 
the furnace input rating. The 100 000 Btu/h (29 kW) furnace 
in this example falls within this range, so a 4 inch (102 mm) 
connector is adequate. 


Chimney Liner Diameter. The total input to the common 
vent is 135 000 Btu/h (40 kW). Using the Common Vent 
Capacity portion of Table 510.2(1), read down the total Vent 
Height (H) column to 30 feet (9144 mm) and across this row 
to find the smallest vent diameter in the FAN + NAT column 
that has a Btu/h rating greater than 135 000 Btu/h (40 kW). 
The 4 inch (102 mm) common vent has a capacity of 138 000 
Btu/h (40.4 kW). Reducing the maximum capacity by 20 per- 
cent results in a maximum capacity for a 4 inch (102 mm) 
corrugated liner of 110 000 Btu/h (32 kW), less than the total 
input of 135 000 Btu/h (40 kW). So a larger liner is needed. 
The 5 inch (127 mm) common vent capacity listed in Table 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


510.2(1) is 210 000 Btu/h (62 kW), and after reducing by 20 
percent is 168 000 Btu/h (49.2 kW). Therefore, a 5 inch (127 
mm) corrugated metal liner should be used in this example. 


Single Wall Connectors. Once it has been established 
that relining the chimney is necessary, Type B double-wall 
vent connectors are not specifically required. This example 
could be redone using Table 510.2(2) for single-wall vent 
connectors. For this case, the vent connector and liner diam- 
eters would be the same as found for Type B double-wall con- 
nectors. [NFPA 54:F.2.4] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX G 


433 


434 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX H - PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 | 5 16 
Adopt Entire Chapter X XX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 435 


436 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX H 
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


H 101.0 General. 


H 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides general 
guidelines for the materials, design, and installation of pri- 
vate sewage disposal systems. 


H 101.2 General Requirements. Where permitted by Sec- 
tion 713.0, the building sewer shall be permitted to be con- 
nected to a private sewage disposal system in accordance with 
the provisions of this appendix. The type of system shall be 
determined on the basis of location, soil porosity, and ground- 
water level, and shall be designed to receive all sewage from 
the property. The system, except as otherwise approved, shall 
consist of a septic tank with effluent discharging into a sub- 
surface disposal field, into one or more seepage pits, or into 
a combination of subsurface disposal field and seepage pits. 
The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to grant 
exceptions to the provisions of this appendix for permitted 
structures that have been destroyed due to fire or natural dis- 
aster, and that cannot be reconstructed in compliance with 
these provisions provided that such exceptions are the mini- 
mum necessary. 


H 101.3 Quantity and Quality. Where the quantity or qual- 
ity of the sewage is such that the above system cannot be 
expected to function satisfactorily for commercial, agricul- 
tural, and industrial plumbing systems; for installations where 
appreciable amounts of industrial or indigestible wastes are 
produced; for occupancies producing abnormal quantities of 
sewage or liquid waste; or where grease interceptors are 
required by other parts of this code, the method of sewage 
treatment and disposal shall be first approved by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. Special sewage disposal systems for 
minor, limited, or temporary uses shall be first approved by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 101.4 Septic Tank and Disposal Field Systems. Dis- 
posal systems shall be designed to utilize the most porous or 
absorptive portions of the soil formation. Where the ground- 
water level extends to within 12 feet (3658 mm) or less of the 
ground surface or where the upper soil is porous, and the 
underlying stratum is rock or impervious soil, a septic tank 
and disposal field system shall be installed. 


H 101.5 Flood Hazard Areas. Disposal systems shall be 
located outside of flood hazard areas. 


Exception: Where suitable sites outside of flood hazard areas 
are not available, disposal systems shall be permitted to be 
located in flood hazard areas on sites where the effects of 
inundation under conditions of the design flood are mini- 
mized. 


H 101.6 Design. Private sewage disposal systems shall be so 
designed that additional seepage pits or subsurface drain 
fields, equivalent to not less than 100 percent of the required 
original system, shall be permitted to be installed where the 
original system cannot absorb all the sewage. No division of 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


the lot or erection of structures on the lot shall be made where 
such division or structure impairs the usefulness of the 100 
percent expansion area. 

H 101.7 Capacity. No property shall be improved more than 
its capacity to absorb sewage effluent properly by the means 
provided in this code. 


Exception: The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be per- 
mitted to, at its discretion, approve an alternate system. 


H 101.8 Location. No private sewage disposal system, or 
part thereof, shall be located in any lot other than the lot that 
is the site of the building or structure served by such private 
sewage disposal system, nor shall any private sewage disposal 
system or part thereof be located at any point having less than 
the minimum distances indicated in Table H 101.8. 


Nothing contained in this code shall be construed to pro- 
hibit the use of all or part of an abutting lot to provide addi- 
tional space for a private sewage disposal system or part 
thereof where proper cause, transfer of ownership, or change 
of boundary not in violation of other requirements has been 
first established to the satisfaction of the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. The instrument recording such action shall con- 
stitute an agreement with the Authority Having Jurisdiction, 
which shall clearly state and show that the areas so joined or 
used shall be maintained as a unit during the time they are so 
used. Such agreement shall be recorded in the office of the 
County Recorder as part of the conditions of ownership of 
said properties and shall be binding on heirs, successors, and 
assigns to such properties. A copy of the instrument record- 
ing such proceedings shall be filed with the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


H 101.9 Building Permit. Where there is insufficient lot 
area or improper soil conditions for sewage disposal for the 
building or land use proposed, and the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction so finds, no building permit shall be issued, and 
no private sewage disposal shall be permitted. Where space or 
soil conditions are critical, no building permit shall be issued 
until engineering data, and test reports satisfactory to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction have been submitted and 
approved. 

H 101.10 Additional Requirements. Nothing contained 
in this appendix shall be construed to prevent the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction from requiring compliance with addi- 
tional requirements than those contained herein, where such 
additional requirements are essential to maintaining a safe 
and sanitary condition. 

H 101.11 Alternate Systems. Alternate systems shall be 
permitted to be used by special permission of the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction after being satisfied with their adequacy. 
This authorization is based on extensive field and test data 
from conditions similar to those at the proposed site or 
requires such additional data as necessary to assure that the 


437 


APPENDIX H 


alternate system will produce continuous and long-range 
results at the proposed site, not less than equivalent to sys- 
tems which are specifically authorized. 


Where demonstration systems are to be considered for 
installation, conditions for installation, maintenance, and 
monitoring at each such site shall first be established by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

Approved aerobic systems shall be permitted to be sub- 
stituted for conventional septic tanks provided the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction is satisfied that such systems will pro- 
duce results not less than equivalent to septic tanks, whether 
their aeration systems are operating or not. 


TABLE H 101.8 
LOCATION OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM 


H 201.0 Capacity of Septic Tanks. 


H 201.1 General. The liquid capacity of septic tanks shall 
comply with Table H 201.1(1) and Table H 201.1(4) as deter- 
mined by the number of bedrooms or apartment units in 
dwelling occupancies and the estimated waste/sewage design 
flow rate or the number of plumbing fixture units as deter- 
mined from Table 702.1 of this code, whichever is greater in 
other building occupancies. The capacity of any one septic 
tank and its drainage system shall be limited to the soil struc- 
ture classification in Table H 201.1(2), and as specified in 
Table H 201.1(3). 


TABLE H 201.1(1) 
CAPACITY OF SEPTIC TANKS): 2:3. 4 


MINIMUM SEEPAGE SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING OTHER USES: | MINIMUM SEP 
BUILDING SEPTIC DISPOSAL ^ MAXIMUM FIX- К Ё 
HORIZONTAL SEWER TANK FIELD PIT OR DWELLINGS - UNITS OR TURE UNITS TIC TANK 
DISTANCE CESSPOOL NUMBER OF | APARTMENTS- | SERVED PER CAPACITY 

Buildi BEDROOMS | ONE BEDROOM (gallons) 

uilding n 2 feet 5 feet 8 feet 8 feet EACH TABTE 702:1 
structures 
Property line lor2 — 15 750 
adjoining pri- Clear? 5 feet 5 feet 8 feet 3 = 20 1000 
vate property 4 2 units 25 1200 
Wat l 
wel PPY 50 feet? | SOfeet | 100 feet | 150 feet 5 or 6 3 33 1500 
Streams and = 4 45 2000 
other bodies 50 feet 50 feet | 100 feet? | 150 feet = 5 55 2250 
of water " 6 60 2500 
Trees = 10 feet Е 10 feet 
Seepage pits or = 7 70 206 

— 5 feet 5 feet 12 feet 
cesspools? — 8 80 3000 
Disposal field? - 5 feet 4 feet? 5 feet – 9 90 3250 
On-site = 10 100 3500 
: 5 

აისი water 1 foot 5 feet 5 feet 5 feet For SI units: 1 gallon = 3.785 L 
service 106 Notes: 
ee _ _ 5 feet 5 feet ! Extra bedroom, 150 gallons (568 L) each. 

QE - ? Extra dwelling units over 10: 250 gallons (946 L) each. 
dic public 10 feet? 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet ? Extra fixture units over 100: 25 gallons (94.6 L) per fixture unit. 
Watet Mau 4 Septic tank sizes in this table include sludge storage capacity and the con- 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm nection of domestic food waste disposers without further volume increase. 
Notes: 


| Including porches and steps, whether covered or uncovered, breezeways, 


roofed porte cocheres, roofed patios, carports, covered walks, covered 
driveways, and similar structures or appurtenances. 

? See Section 312.3. 

Drainage piping shall clear domestic water supply wells by not less than 

50 feet (15 240 mm). This distance shall be permitted to be reduced to not 

less than 25 feet (7620 mm) where the drainage piping is constructed of 

materials approved for use within a building. 

4 Plus 2 feet (610 mm) for each additional 1 foot (305 mm) of depth more 
than 1 foot (305 mm) below the bottom of the drain line. (See Section H 
601.0) 

5 See Section 720.0. 

For parallel construction — For crossings, approval by the Health Depart- 

ment shall be required. 

These minimum clear horizontal distances shall also apply to disposal 

fields, seepage pits, and the mean high-tide line. 

Where disposal fields, seepage pits, or both are installed in sloping ground, 

the minimum horizontal distance between any part of the leaching system 

and ground surface shall be 15 feet (4572 mm). 


438 


TABLE H 201.1(2) 
DESIGN CRITERIA OF FIVE TYPICAL SOILS 


MAXIMUM ABSORP- 
REQUIRED TION CAPACITY IN 
SQUARE FEET GALLONS PER 
TYPE OF SOIL OF LEACHING SQUARE FEET OF 
AREA PER 100 LEACHING AREA 
GALLONS FOR A 24-HOUR 
PERIOD 
Coarse sand or gravel 20 5.0 
Fine sand 25 4.0 
Sandy loam or sandy clay 40 2.5 
Clay with considerable 90 1.1 
sand or gravel 
Clay with small amount 120 0.8 
of sand or gravel 


For SI units: 1 square foot — 0.0929 mê, 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1 gallon per 
square foot — 40.7 L/m? 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE H 201.1(3) 


LEACHING AREA SIZE BASED ON SEPTIC TANK CAPACITY 


APPENDIX H 


REQUIRED SQUARE FEET OF LEACHING AREA 
PER 100 GALLONS SEPTIC TANK CAPACITY 


MAXIMUM SEPTIC TANK SIZE ALLOWABLE 


(square feet per 100 gallons) (gallons) 
20-25 7500 
40 5000 
90 3500 
120 3000 


For SI units: 1 square foot per 100 gallons = 0.000245 m’/L, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 


TABLE H 201.1(4) 


ESTIMATED WASTE/SEWAGE FLOW RATES!:2:3 


TYPE OF OCCUPANCY 


GALLONS PER DAY 


Airports (per employee) 15 
Airports (per passenger) 5 
Auto washers — check with equipment manufacturer -= 
Bowling alleys — with snack bar only (per lane) 75 
Campground — with central comfort station (per person) 35 
Campground — with flush toilets - no showers (per person) 25 
Camps (day) — no meals served (per person) 15 
Camps (summer and seasonal camps) — (per person) 50 
Churches — sanctuary (per seat) 5 
Churches — with kitchen waste (per seat) 7 
Dance halls — (per person) 5 
Factories — no showers (рег employee) 25 
Factories — with showers (per employee) 35 
Factories — with cafeteria (per employee) 5 
Hospitals — (per bed) 250 
Hospitals — kitchen waste only (per bed) 25 
Hospitals — laundry waste only (per bed) 40 
Hotels — no kitchen waste (per bed) 60 
Institutions — resident (per person) 75 
Nursing home - (per person) 125 
Rest home - (per person) 125 
Laundries — self-service with minimum 10 hours per day (per wash cycle) 50 
Laundries — commercial check with manufacturer's specification — 
Motel (per bed space) 50 
Motel — with kitchen (per bed space) 60 
Offices — (per employee) 20 
Parks — mobile homes (per space) 250 
Parks (picnic) — with toilets only (per parking space) 20 
Parks (recreational vehicles) — without water hook-up (per space) 75 
Parks (recreational vehicles) — with water and sewer hook-up (per space) 100 
Restaurants — cafeteria (per employee) 20 
Restaurants — with toilet waste (per customer) 7 
Restaurants — with kitchen waste (per meal) 6 
Restaurants — with kitchen waste disposable service (per meal) 2 
Restaurants — with garbage disposal (per meal) 1 
Restaurants — with cocktail lounge (per customer) 2 
Schools staff and office (per person) 20 
Schools — elementary (per student) 15 
Schools — intermediate and high (per student) 20 
Schools — with gym and showers (per student) 5 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


439 


APPENDIX H 


TABLE H 201.1(4) (continued) 
ESTIMATED WASTE/SEWAGE FLOW RATES! 2, 3 


TYPE OF OCCUPANCY GALLONS PER DAY 
Schools — with cafeteria (per student) 3 

Schools (boarding) – total waste (per person) 100 
Service station — with toilets for 1* bay 1000 
Service station — with toilets for each additional bay 500 

Stores — (per employee) 20 

Stores — with public restrooms (per 10 square feet of floor space) 1 
Swimming pools — public (per person) 10 
Theaters — auditoriums (per seat) 5 
Theaters — with drive-in (per space) 10 


For SI units: 1 square foot = 0.0929 m7, 1 gallon per day = 3.785 L/day 
Notes: 


(a) Waste/sewage flow, up to 1500 gallons per day (5678 L/day) 
Flow x 1.5 = septic tank size 
(b) Waste/sewage flow, over 1500 gallons per day (5678 L/day) 
Flow x 0.75 1125 — septic tank size 
(c) Secondary system shall be sized for total flow per 24 hours. 
? See Section H 201.1. 


Sewage disposal systems sized using the estimated waste/sewage flow rates shall be calculated as follows: 


Because of the many variables encountered, it is not possible to set absolute values for waste/sewage flow rates for all situations. The designer should eval- 


uate each situation and, where figures in this table need modification; they should be made with the concurrence of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 301.0 Area of Disposal Fields and Seepage Pits. 


H 301.1 General. The minimum effective absorption area 
in disposal fields in square feet (m°), and in seepage pits in 
square feet (m?) of sidewall, shall be predicated on the 
required septic tank capacity of gallons (liters), estimated 
waste/sewage flow rate, or whichever is greater, and shall be 
in accordance with Table H 201.1(2) as determined by the 
type of soil found in the excavation, and shall be as follows: 


(1) Where disposal fields are installed, not less than 150 
square feet (13.9 m?) of trench bottom shall be provided 
for each system exclusive of any hard pan, rock, clay, or 
other impervious formations. Sidewall area more than 
the required 12 inches (305 mm) and not exceeding 36 
inches (914 mm) below the leach line shall be permitted 
to be added to the trench bottom area where computing 
absorption areas. 


(2) Where leaching beds are permitted instead of trenches, 
the area of each such bed shall be not less than 50 percent 
greater than the tabular requirements for trenches. 
Perimeter sidewall area more than the required 12 inches 
(305 mm) and not exceeding 36 inches (914 mm) below 
the leach line shall be permitted to be added to the trench 
bottom area where computing absorption areas. 


(3) No excavation for a leach line or leach bed shall be 
located within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the water table nor to 
a depth where sewage is capable of contaminating the 
underground water stratum that is usable for domestic 
purposes. 


Exception: In areas where the records or data indicate 
that the groundwaters are grossly degraded, the 5 foot 
(1524 mm) separation requirement shall be permitted to 
be reduced by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. The 
applicant shall supply evidence of groundwater depth to 
the satisfaction of the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


440 


(4) 


(3) 


(6) 


The minimum effective absorption area in any seepage 
pit shall be calculated as the excavated sidewall area 
below the inlet exclusive of any hardpan, rock, clay, or 
other impervious formations. The minimum required 
area of porous formation shall be provided in one or more 
seepage pits. No excavation shall extend within 10 feet 
(3048 mm) of the water table nor to a depth where 
sewage 1s capable of contaminating underground water 
stratum that is usable for domestic purposes. 


Exception: In areas where the records or data indicate 
that the groundwaters are grossly degraded, the 10 foot 
(3048 mm) separation requirement shall be permitted to 
be reduced by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


The applicant shall supply evidence of groundwater 
depth to the satisfaction of the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


Leaching chambers that comply with IAPMO PS 63 and 
bundled expanded polystyrene synthetic aggregate units 
that comply with IAPMO IGC 276 shall be sized using 
a 0.70 multiplier applied to the required area in Table H 
201.1(2). 

Systems that combine treatment and disposal of sewage 
within a single footprint and comply with NSF 40 Class 1 
shall be sized using a 0.70 multiplier applied to the 
required area in Table H 201.1(2) for both leach lines and 
leach beds. No system component for a combined treat- 
ment and disposal leach line or leach bed shall be located 
within 2 feet (610 mm) of the water table nor to a depth 
where sewage is capable of contaminating the under- 
ground water stratum that is usable for domestic purposes. 
Combined treatment and disposal system operation and 
maintenance shall be in accordance with the manufac- 
turer's instructions. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Exception: Combined treatment and disposal systems 
tested and certified in a bed configuration in accordance 
with NSF 40 Class 1 are exempted from the requirements 
of Section H 301.1(2). 


H 401.0 Percolation Test. 


H 401.1 Pit Sizes. Where practicable, disposal field and 
seepage pit sizes shall be computed from Table H 201.1(2). 
Seepage pit sizes shall be computed by percolation tests 
unless use of Table H 201.1(2) is approved by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


H 401.2 Absorption Qualities. The absorption qualities 
of seepage pits and questionable soils other than those listed 
in Table H 201.1(2), the proposed site, shall be subjected to 
percolation tests acceptable to the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


H 401.3 Absorption Rates. Where a percolation test is 
required, no private disposal system shall be permitted to 
serve a building where that test shows the absorption capac- 
ity of the soil is less than 0.83 gallons per square foot (gal/ft?^) 
(33.8 L/m’) or more than 5.12 gal/ft? (208.6 L/m?) of leach- 
ing area per 24 hours. Where the percolation test shows an 
absorption rate greater than 5.12 gal/f? (208.6 L/m?) per 24 
hours, a private disposal system shall be permitted where the 
site does not overlie groundwaters protected for drinking 
water supplies, a minimum thickness of 2 feet (610 mm) of 
the native soil below the entire proposed system is replaced 
by loamy sand, and the system design is based on percolation 
tests made in the loamy sand. 


H 501.0 Septic Tank Construction. 


H 501.1 Plans. Plans for septic tanks shall be submitted to 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction for approval. Such plans 
shall show dimensions, reinforcing, structural calculations, 
and such other pertinent data as required. 


H 501.2 Design. Septic tank design shall be such as to pro- 
duce a clarified effluent consistent with accepted standards 
and shall provide adequate space for sludge and scum accu- 
mulations. 


H 501.3 Construction. Septic tanks shall be constructed of 
solid, durable materials not subject to excessive corrosion or 
decay and shall be watertight. 


H 501.4 Compartments. Septic tanks shall have not less 
than two compartments unless otherwise approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. The inlet compartment of any 
septic tank shall be not less than two-thirds of the total capac- 
ity of the tank, nor less than 500 gallons (1892 L) liquid 
capacity, and shall be not less than 3 feet (914 mm) in width 
and 5 feet (1524 mm) in length. Liquid depth shall be not less 
than 2^ feet (762 mm) nor more than 6 feet (1829 mm). The 
secondary compartment of a septic tank shall have a capacity 
of not less than 250 gallons (946 L) and a capacity not 
exceeding one-third of the total capacity of such tank. In sep- 
tic tanks having a 1500 gallon (5678 L) capacity, the sec- 
ondary compartment shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) 
in length. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX H 


H 501.5 Access. Access to each septic tank shall be pro- 
vided by not less than two manholes 20 inches (508 mm) in 
minimum dimension or by an equivalent removable cover 
slab. One access manhole shall be located over the inlet, and 
one access manhole shall be located over the outlet. Where a 
first compartment exceeds 12 feet (3658 mm) in length, an 
additional manhole shall be provided over the baffle wall. 


H 501.6 Pipe Opening Sizes. The inlet and outlet pipe 
openings shall not be larger in size than the connecting sewer 
pipe. The vertical leg of round inlet and outlet fittings shall 
not be less in size than the connecting sewer pipe nor less than 
4 inches (100 mm) in diameter. A baffle-type fitting shall 
have the equivalent cross-sectional area of the connecting 
sewer pipe and not less than a 4 inch (102 mm) horizontal 
dimension where measured at the inlet and outlet pipe inverts. 


H 501.7 Pipe Extension. The inlet and outlet pipe or baf- 
fle shall extend 4 inches (102 mm) above and not less than 12 
inches (305 mm) below the water surface. The invert of the 
inlet pipe shall be at a level not less than 2 inches (51 mm) 
above the invert of the outlet pipe. 


H 501.8 Free Vent Area. Inlet and outlet pipe fittings or baf- 
fles and compartment partitions shall have a free vent area 
equal to the required cross-sectional area of the house sewer 
or private sewer discharging therein to provide free ventila- 
tion above the water surface from the disposal field or seep- 
age pit through the septic tank, house sewer, and stack to the 
outer air. 


H 501.9 Sidewalls. The sidewalls shall extend not less than 
9 inches (229 mm) above the liquid depth. The cover of the 
septic tank shall be not less than 2 inches (51 mm) above the 
back vent openings. 


H 501.10 Partitions and Baffles. Partitions or baffles 
between compartments shall be of solid, durable material and 
shall extend not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the liquid 
level. The transfer port between compartments shall be a min- 
imum size equivalent to the tank inlet, but in no case less than 
4 inches (102 mm) in size, shall be installed in the inlet com- 
partment side of the baffle so that the entry into the port is 
placed 65 percent to 75 percent in the depth of the liquid. 
Wooden baffles are prohibited. 


H 501.11 Structural Design. The structural design of sep- 
tic tanks shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) Each such tank shall be structurally designed to withstand 
all anticipated earth or other loads. Septic tank covers shall 
be capable of supporting an earth load of not less than 500 
pounds per square foot (Ib/f?) (2441 kg/m?) where the 
maximum coverage does not exceed 3 feet (914 mm). 


(2) In flood hazard areas, tanks shall be anchored to counter 
buoyant forces during conditions of the design flood. The 
vent termination and service manhole of the tank shall 
be not less than 2 feet (610 mm) above the design flood 
elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the 
inflow of floodwater or the outflow ofthe contents of the 
tanks during conditions of the design flood. 

H 501.12 Manholes. Septic tanks installed under concrete 

or blacktop paving shall have the required manholes accessi- 

ble by extending the manhole openings to grade in a manner 
acceptable to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


441 


APPENDIX H 


H 501.13 Materials. The materials used for constructing a 
septic tank shall be in accordance with the following: 


(1) Materials used in constructing a concrete septic tank shall 
be in accordance with applicable standards in Chapter 
17. 


(2) The minimum wall thickness of a steel septic tank shall 
be number 12 U.S. gauge (0.109 of an inch) (2.77 mm), 
and each such tank shall be protected from corrosion 
both externally and internally by an approved bituminous 
coating or by other acceptable means. 


(3) Septic tanks constructed of alternate materials shall be 
permitted to be approved by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction where in accordance with approved applicable 
standards. Wooden septic tanks shall be prohibited. 


H 501.14 Prefabricated Septic Tanks. Prefabricated sep- 
tic tanks shall comply with the following requirements: 


(1) Manufactured or prefabricated septic tanks shall comply 
with IAPMO/ANSI Z1000, IAPMO IGC 262, or CSA 
B66 and be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion. Prefabricated bituminous coated septic tanks shall 
comply with UL 70. 


(2) Independent laboratory tests and engineering calculations 
certifying the tank capacity and structural stability shall be 
provided as required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 601.0 Disposal Fields. 


H 601.1 Distribution Lines. Distribution lines shall be con- 
structed of clay tile laid with open joints, perforated clay pipe, 
perforated bituminous fiber pipe, perforated high-density 
polyethylene pipe, perforated ABS pipe, perforated PVC 
pipe, or other approved materials, provided that approved 
openings are available for distribution of the effluent into the 
trench area. 


H 601.1.1 Bundled Expanded Polystyrene Syn- 
thetic Aggregate Units. Bundled expanded poly- 
styrene synthetic aggregate units with an integrated 
distribution line consisting of perforated, corrugated 
high-density polyethylene pipe that complies with 
IAPMO IGC 276 shall be permitted. 
H 601.2 Filter Material. Before placing filter material or 
drain lines in a prepared excavation, smeared or compacted 
surfaces shall be removed from trenches by raking to a depth 
of 1 inch (25.4 mm) and the loose material removed. Clean 
stone, gravel, slag, or similar filter material acceptable to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, varying in size from % of an 
inch to 2% inches (19.1 mm to 64 mm), shall be placed in the 
trench to the depth and grade required by this section. Drain- 
pipe shall be placed on filter material in an approved manner. 
The drain lines shall then be covered with filter material to 
the minimum depth required by this section, and this material 
covered with untreated building paper, straw, or similar 
porous material to prevent the closure of voids with earth 
backfill. No earth backfill shall be placed over the filter mate- 
rial cover until after inspection and acceptance. 


Exception: Listed or approved plastic leaching chambers, 
bundled expanded polystyrene synthetic aggregate units, and 


442 


systems that treat and dispose of sewage within a single foot- 
print, as described in Section H 301.1(5) and Section H 
301.1(6), shall be permitted to be used in lieu of pipe and fil- 
ter material. Chamber, bundled expanded polystyrene syn- 
thetic aggregate unit, and systems that treat and dispose of 
sewage within a single footprint, installations shall follow the 
rules for disposal fields, where applicable, and shall be in 
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 


H 601.3 Grade Board. A grade board staked in the trench to 
the depth of filter material shall be utilized where the distribu- 
tion line is constructed with drain tile or a flexible pipe material 
that will not maintain alignment without continuous support. 


H 601.4 Seepage Pits. Where seepage pits are used in 
combination with disposal fields, the filter material in the 
trenches shall terminate not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) from 
the pit excavation, and the line extending from such points to 
the seepage pit shall be approved pipe with watertight joints. 


H 601.5 Distribution Boxes. Where two or more drain 
lines are installed, an approved distribution box of sufficient 
size to receive lateral lines shall be installed at the head of 
each disposal field. The invert of outlets shall be level, and the 
invert of the inlet shall be not less than 1 inch (25.4 mm) 
above the outlets. Distribution boxes shall be designed to 
ensure equal flow and shall be installed on a level concrete 
slab in natural or compacted soil. 


H 601.6 Laterals. Laterals from a distribution box to the dis- 
posal field shall be approved pipe with watertight joints. Mul- 
tiple disposal field laterals, where practicable, shall be of 
uniform length. 


H 601.7 Connections. Connections between a septic tank 
and a distribution box shall be laid with approved pipe with 
watertight joints on natural ground or compacted fill. 


H 601.8 Dosing Tanks. Where the quantity of sewage 
exceeds the amount that is permitted to be disposed of in 500 
lineal feet (152.4 m) of leach line, a dosing tank shall be used. 
Dosing tanks shall be equipped with an automatic siphon or 
pump that discharges the tank once every 3 or 4 hours. The 
tank shall have a capacity equal to 60 to 75 percent of the 
interior capacity of the pipe to be dosed at one time. Where 
the total length of pipe exceeds 1000 lineal feet (305 m), the 
dosing tank shall be provided with two siphons or pumps dos- 
ing alternately and each serving one-half of the leach field. 


H 601.9 Construction. Disposal fields shall be constructed 
in accordance with Table H 601.9. 


Minimum spacing between trenches or leaching beds 
shall be not less than 4 feet (1219 mm) plus 2 feet (610 mm) 
for each additional foot (305 mm) of depth more than 1 foot 
(305 mm) below the bottom of the drain line. Distribution 
drain lines in leaching beds shall be not more than 6 feet 
(1829 mm) apart on centers, and no part of the perimeter of 
the leaching bed shall exceed 3 feet (914 mm) from a distri- 
bution drain line. Disposal fields, trenches, and leaching beds 
shall not be paved over or covered by concrete or a material 
that is capable of reducing or inhibiting a possible evaporation 
of sewer effluent. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE H 601.9 
GENERAL DISPOSAL FIELD REQUIREMENTS 


ELEMENT MINIMUM MAXIMUM 
Number of drain lines per 1 ! 
field 
Length of each line - 100 feet 
Bottom width of trench 18 inches 36 inches 
. lines, center- 6 feet წ 
Depth of earth cover of lines 12 inches И 
(preferred 18 inches) 
Grade of lines level 3 inches per 100 feet 
Filter material under drain | 
lines 12 inches - 
Filter material over drain lines | 2 inches - 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 inch per foot = 83.3 
mm/m 


H 601.10 Joints. Where necessary on sloping ground to pre- 
vent excessive line slope, leach lines or leach beds shall be 
stepped. The lines between each horizontal section shall be 
made with watertight joints and shall be designed, so each 
horizontal leaching trench or bed shall be utilized to the max- 
imum capacity before the effluent shall pass to the next lower 
leach line or bed. The lines between each horizontal leaching 
section shall be made with approved watertight joints and 
installed on the natural or unfilled ground. 


H 701.0 Seepage Pits. 


H 701.1 Capacity. The capacity of seepage pits shall be 
based on the quantity of liquid waste discharging thereinto 
and on the character and porosity of the surrounding soil, and 
shall be in accordance with Section H 301.0 of this appendix. 


H 701.2 Multiple Installations. Multiple seepage pit instal- 
lations shall be served through an approved distribution box 
or be connected in series using a watertight connection laid on 
undistributed or compacted soil. The outlet from the pit shall 
have an approved vented leg fitting extending not less than 12 
inches (305 mm) below the inlet fitting. 


H 701.3 Construction. A seepage pit shall be circular in shape 
and shall have an excavated diameter of not less than 4 feet 
(1219 mm). Each such pit shall be lined with approved-type 
whole new hard-burned clay brick, concrete brick, concrete cir- 
cular-type cesspool blocks, or other approved materials. 
Approval shall be obtained before construction for any pit hav- 
ing an excavated diameter greater than 6 feet (1829 mm). 


H 701.4 Lining. The lining in a seepage pit shall be laid on 
a firm foundation. Lining materials shall be placed tight 
together and laid with joints staggered. Except in the case of 
approved-type precast concrete circular sections, no brick or 
block shall be greater in height than its width and shall be laid 
flat to form not less than a 4 inch (102 mm) wall. Brick or 
block greater than 12 inches (305 mm) in length shall have 
chamfered matching ends and be scored to provide for seep- 
age. Excavation voids behind the brick, block, or concrete 
liner shall have not less than 6 inches (152 mm) of clean 3/4 
of an inch (19.1 mm) gravel or rock. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX H 


H 701.5 Brick and Block. Brick or block used in seepage 
pit construction shall have a compressive strength of not less 
than 2500 pounds per square inch (Ib/in?) (1 757 674 kg/m’). 


H 701.6 Sidewall. A seepage pit shall have a minimum side- 
wall (not including the arch) of 10 feet (3048 mm) below the 
inlet. 


H 701.7 Arch and Dome. The arch or dome of a seepage 
pit shall be permitted to be constructed in one of three ways: 


(1) Approved-type hard-burned clay brick or solid concrete 
brick or block laid in cement mortar. 


(2) Approved brick or block laid dry. In both of the above 
methods, an approved cement mortar covering of not less 
than 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness shall be applied, said 
covering to extend not less than 6 inches (152 mm) 
beyond the sidewalls of the pit. 


(3) Approved-type one or two-piece reinforced concrete 
slabs of not less than 2500 Ib/in? (1 757 674 kg/m?) min- 
imum compressive strength, not less than 5 inches (127 
mm) thick, and designed to support an earth load of not 
less than 400 pounds per square foot (lb/ft?) (1953 
kg/m’). Each such cover shall be provided with a 9 inch 
(229 mm) minimum inspection hole with plug or cover 
and shall be coated on the underside with an approved 
bituminous or other nonpermeable protective compound. 


H 701.8 Location. The top of the arch or cover shall be not 
less than 18 inches (457 mm) but not exceed 4 feet (1219 
mm) below the surface of the ground. 


H 701.9 Inlet Fitting. An approved vented inlet fitting shall 
be provided in the seepage pit so arranged as to prevent the 
inflow from damaging the sidewall. 


Exception: Where using a one- or two-piece concrete slab 
cover inlet, fitting shall be permitted to be a one-fourth bend 
fitting discharging through an opening in the top of the slab 
cover. On multiple seepage pit installations, the outlet fittings 
shall comply with Section H 701.2 of this appendix. 


H 801.0 Cesspools. 


H 801.1 Limitations. A cesspool shall be considered as a 
temporary expedient pending the construction of a public 
sewer; as an overflow facility where installed in conjunction 
with an existing cesspool; or as a means of sewage disposal 
for limited, minor, or temporary uses, where first approved 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 801.2 Septic Tanks. Where it is established that a public 
sewer system will be available in less than 2 years, and soil 
and groundwater conditions are favorable to cesspool dis- 
posal, cesspools without septic tanks shall be permitted to be 
installed for single-family dwellings or for other limited uses 
where first approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

H 801.3 Construction. Each cesspool, where permitted, 
shall be in accordance with the construction requirements set 
forth in Section H 701.0 of this appendix for seepage pits and 
shall have a sidewall (not including arch) of not less than 20 
feet (6096 mm) below the inlet, provided, however, that 


443 


APPENDIX H 


where a strata of gravel or equally pervious material of 4 feet 
(1219 mm) in thickness is found, the depth of such sidewall 
shall not exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) below the inlet. 


H 801.4 Existing Installations. Where overflow cesspools 
or seepage pits are added to existing installations, the effluent 
shall leave the existing pit through an approved vented leg 
extending not less than 12 inches (305 mm) downward into 
such existing pit and having its outlet flow line not less than 
6 inches (152 mm) below the inlet. The pipe between pits 
shall be laid with approved watertight joints. 


H 901.0 Commercial or Industrial Special Liquid- 
Waste Disposal. 


H 901.1 Interceptor. Where liquid wastes contain excessive 
amounts of grease, garbage, flammable wastes, sand, or other 
ingredients that affect the operation of a private sewage dis- 
posal system, an interceptor for such wastes shall be installed. 


H 901.2 Installation. Installation of such interceptors shall 
comply with Section 1009.0 of this code, and their location 
shall comply with Table H 101.8 of this appendix. 


H 901.3 Sampling Box. A sampling box shall be installed 
where required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 901.4 Design and Structural Requirement. Intercep- 
tors shall be of approved design and be not less than two com- 
partments. Structural requirements shall comply with Section 
H 501.0 of this appendix. 


H 901.5 Location. Interceptors shall be located as close to 
the source as possible and be accessible for servicing. Nec- 
essary manholes for servicing shall be at grade level and be 
gastight. 


H 901.6 Waste Discharge. Waste discharge from inter- 
ceptors shall be permitted to be connected to a septic tank or 
other primary system or be disposed into a separate disposal 
system. 

H 901.7 Design Criteria. A formula shall be permitted to be 


adapted to other types of occupancies with similar wastes. 
(See Chart H 901.7) 


H 1001.0 Inspection and Testing. 


H 1001.1 Inspection. Inspection requirements shall comply 
with the following: 


(1) Applicable provisions of Section 105.0 of this code and 
this appendix shall be required. Plans shall be required in 
accordance with Section 103.3 of this code. 


(2) System components shall be properly identified as to 
manufacturer. Septic tanks or other primary systems shall 
have the rated capacity permanently marked on the unit. 

(3) Septic tanks or other primary systems shall be installed 
on dry, level, well-compacted soil. 

(4) Where design is predicated on soil tests, the system shall 
be installed at the same location and depth as the tested 
area. 

H 1001.2 Testing. Testing requirements shall comply with 

the following: 

(1) Septic tanks or other primary components shall be filled 
with water to flow line before requesting an inspection. 
Seams or joints shall be left exposed (except the bottom), 
and the tank shall remain watertight. 


(2) A flow test shall be performed through the system to the 
point of effluent disposal. All lines and components shall 


CHART H 901.7 
RECOMMENDED DESIGN CRITERIA 


GREASE AND GARBAGE, COMMERCIAL KITCHENS 
Number of meals EE Interceptor size 
X Waste flow rate! X Retention time? X Storage factor? = ер : 
per peak hour (liquid capacity) 
SAND-SILT OIL, AUTO WASHERS 
Number of > Interceptor size 
: X Waste flow rate! X Retention time? X Storage factor? = ps : 
vehicles per hour (liquid capacity) 
SILT-LINT GREASE, LAUNDRIES, LAUNDROMATS 
Number of 2 cycles per Waste flow EP Interceptor size 
i a 1 Retention time? = Storage factor? = და. 4 
machines hour rate (liquid capacity) 
Notes: 


! For waste flow rate see Table H 201 .1(4). 
? Retention Times: 


(a) Kitchen (commercial) — with dishwasher, garbage disposal, or both = 2.5 hours 


(b) Kitchen (single service) — with garbage disposal = 1.5 hours 
(c) Auto Washers (sand-silt oil) = 2.0 hours 
(d) Laundries/Laundromats = 2.0 hours 
? Storage Factors: 
(a) Kitchen (commercial) — with 8 hours operation = 1 
(b) Kitchen (commercial) — with 16 hours operation = 2 
(c) Kitchen (commercial) — with 24 hours operation = 3 
(d) Kitchen (single service) = 1.5 
(e) Auto Washers (sand-silt oil) — with self service = 1.5 
(f) Auto Washers (sand-silt oil) — with employee operated = 2 
(თ) Laundries/Laundromats — with rock filter = 1.5 hours 


444 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


be watertight. Capacities required air space, and fittings 
shall comply with the provisions outlined in this appen- 
dix. 


H 1101.0 Abandoned Sewers and Sewage Disposal 
Facilities. 


H 1101.1 Plugged and Capped. An abandoned building 
(house) sewer, or part thereof, shall be plugged or capped in 
an approved manner within 5 feet (1524 mm) of the property 
line. 


H 1101.2 Fill Material. A cesspool, a septic tank, or a seep- 
age pit that has been abandoned or has been discontinued oth- 
erwise from further use, or to which no waste or soil pipe 
from a plumbing fixture is connected, shall have the sewage 
removed therefrom and be completely filled with the earth, 
sand, gravel, concrete, or other approved material. 


H 1101.3 Filling Requirements. The top cover or arch 
over the cesspool, septic tank, or seepage pit shall be removed 
before filling, and the filling shall not extend above the top of 
the vertical portions ofthe sidewalls or above the level of any 
outlet pipe until inspection has been called and the cesspool, 
septic tank, or seepage pit has been inspected. After such 
inspection, the cesspool, septic tank, or seepage pit shall be 
filled to the level of the top of the ground. 


H 1101.4 Owner. No person owning or controlling a 
cesspool, septic tank, or seepage pit on the premises of such 
person or in that portion of any public street, alley, or other 
public property abutting such premises shall fail, refuse, or 
neglect to be in accordance with the provisions of this sec- 
tion or upon receipt of notice so to be in accordance with the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


H 1101.5 Permittee. Where disposal facilities are aban- 
doned consequent to connecting any premises with the pub- 
lic sewer, the permittee making the connection shall fill all 
abandoned facilities in accordance with the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction within 30 days from the time of connecting to the 
public sewer. 


H 1201.0 Drawings and Specifications. 


H 1201.1 General. The Authority Having Jurisdiction, 
Health Officer, or other department having jurisdiction shall 
be permitted to require the following information before a 
permit is issued for a private sewage disposal system or at a 
time during the construction thereof: 


(1) Plot plan drawn to scale, completely dimensioned, show- 
ing direction and approximate slope of surface, location 
of present or proposed retaining walls, drainage chan- 
nels, water supply lines or wells, paved areas and struc- 
tures on the plot, number of bedrooms or plumbing 
fixtures in each structure, and location of the private 
sewage disposal system with relation to lot lines and 
structures. 


(2) Details of construction necessary to ensure compliance 
with the requirements of this appendix together with a 
full description of the complete installation including 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX H 


quality, kind, and grade of materials, equipment, con- 
struction, workmanship, and methods of assembly and 
installation. 


(3) A log of soil formations and groundwater levels as deter- 
mined by test holes dug in close proximity to a proposed 
seepage pit or disposal field, together with a statement 
of water absorption characteristics of the soil at the pro- 
posed site, as determined by approved percolation tests. 


445 


446 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX I - INSTALLATION STANDARDS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
| 1.2 10C АС 55 SS/CC| 1 1R|2|3 4 |5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter XXX XX XIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections X XX X 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
| IAPMO IS 31-2022 x X X X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: 1 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 447 


448 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX I 
INSTALLATION STANDARDS 


CONTENTS 
Page 

IAPMO IS 26-2019** 

Trenchless Insertion of Polyethylene (PE) Pipe for Sewer Гаїегаіѕ...........................................................«... 451 
IAPMO IS 31-2022 

Installation Standard for PEX Tubing Systems for Hot- and Cold Water Оіѕїгірийоп...................................... 455 
IAPMO IS 33-2019? 

Thrust Blocking for Rubber Gasketed and Solvent Cement Joints ....................s sess 463 
TCNA Handbook-2022 

For Ceramic, Glass, and Stone ყმის ““ >_".................-_- _-_-_-_-___-__-__–_- 471 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 449 


450 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


"The information contained in this appendix is not part of this American National Standard (ANS) and has not been 
processed in accordance with ANSI's requirements for an ANS. As such, this appendix may contain material that has 
not been subjected to public review or a consensus process. In addition, it does not contain requirements necessary 
for conformance to the standard." 


The following IAPMO Installation Standard is included here for the convenience of the users of the Uniform Plumb- 
ing Code. It is not considered as a part of the Uniform Plumbing Code unless formally adopted as such. This Instal- 
lation Standard is an independent, stand-alone document published by the International Association of Plumbing 
and Mechanical Officials and is printed herein by the expressed written permission of IAPMO. 


TRENCHLESS INSERTION OF 
POLYETHYLENE (PE) PIPE FOR SEWER LATERALS 


IAPMO IS 26-2019 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


1 Scope ASTM International 
1.1 General ASTM D3261 
This standard shall govern the trenchless installation Standard Specification for Butt Heat Fusion Poly- 
of polyethylene (PE) pipe for use in sanitary and ethylene (PE) Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) 
storm sewers. The installed pipe shall comply with Plastic Pipe and Tubing 
the requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code 
(UPC™) published by the International Association 
of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (ІАРМО) as ASTM F714 
to grade and connections to existing pipe and shall Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Plastic 
also comply with this standard. This standard spec- Pipe (DR-PR) Based on Outside Diameter 
ifies requirements for the installation of the trench- 
less insertion of polyethylene (PE) pipe for use in 
sanitary and storm sewers. ASTM F894 
1.2 Terminology Standard Specification for Polyethylene (PE) Large 
In this Standard, Diameter Profile Wall Sewer and Drain Pipe 
(a) “shall” is used to express a requirement, i.e., a 
provision that the user is obliged to satisfy to ASTM Е1055 
comply with the Standard; Standard Specification for Electrofusion Type Poly- 
(b) “should” is used to express a recommendation, ethylene Fittings for Outside Diameter Controlled 
but not a requirement; Polyethylene and Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) 
(c) “may” is used to express an option or something Pipe and Tubing 
permissible within the scope of the Standard; and 
(d) “сап” is used to express a possibility or a capa- ASTM F2620 
bility. Standard Practice for Heat Fusion Joining of Poly- 
ethylene Pipe and Fittings 
Notes accompanying sections of the Standard do not 
specify requirements or alternative requirements; => 
their purpose is to separate explanatory or informa- 3 Abbreviations 
tive material from the text. Notes to tables and fig- The following abbreviations apply in this Standard: 
ures are considered part of the table or figure and PE — Polyethylene 
can be written as requirements. HDPE — High Density Polyethylene 
2 Reference Publications 
: : "e 4 General 
This Standard refers to the following publications, . 
and where such reference is made, it shall be to the 41 Product Requirements 


current edition of those publications, including all 
amendments published thereto. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Polyethylene (PE) sewer pipe or tubing and fitting 
joining methods shall be installed in accordance 


451 


IS 26 


4.2 


4.3 


4.4 


4.4.1 


4.4.2 


4.4.3 


452 


with the manufacturer's installation instructions and 
comply with ASTM F714, ASTM F894 the appli- 
cable nationally recognized standard. 


HDPE Materials 


HDPE Extra High Molecular Weight 3408 SDR 17 
Pipe Socket-Type PE Fittings for Outside Diameter 
Controlled. 


Note: The HDPE 3408 SDR 17 pipe used in this 
process was selected because of its ability to retain 
its circular shape even when bent on a 1.2 m (4 ft) 
radius during and after installation. 


Protection of Pipe 


Pipe shall be stored in a way to protect it from 
mechanical damage (slitting, puncturing, etc.). It 
shall be stored under cover to keep it clean and avoid 
long term exposure to sunlight. Exposure to sunlight 
during normal construction periods is acceptable. 


Joining Methods 


PE joints shall be made in accordance with the man- 
ufacturer’s installation instructions. PE pipe shall be 
joined to other pipe materials by an approved listed 
adapter or transition fittings listed for the specific 
transition intended. 


Butt-Fusion Joints [2024 UPC 705.5.1.1] 


Butt-fusion joints for PE pipe shall be installed in 
accordance with ASTM F2620 and shall be made by 
heating the prepared ends of two pipes, pipe and fit- 
ting, or two fittings by holding ends against a heated 
element. The heated element shall be removed when 
the required melt or times are obtained, and heated 
ends shall be placed together with applied force. Do 
not disturb the joint until cooled to ambient temper- 
ature. 


Electro-Fusion Joints [2024 UPC 705.5.1.2] 


Electro-fusion joints shall be heated internally by a 
conductor at the interface of the joint. Fittings shall 
comply with ASTM F1055 for the performance 
requirements of polyethylene electro-fusion fittings. 
The specified electro-fusion cycle used to form the 
joint requires consideration of the properties of the 
materials being joined, the design of the fitting being 
used, and the environmental conditions. Align and 
restrain fitting to pipe to prevent movement and 
apply electric current to the fitting. Turn off the cur- 
rent when the required time has elapsed to heat the 
joint. Do not disturb the joint until cooled to ambi- 
ent temperature. 


Socket-Fusion Joints [2024 UPC 705.5.1.3] 


Socket fusion joints shall be installed in accordance 
with ASTM F2620 and shall be made by simultane- 
ously heating the outside surface of a pipe end and 
the inside of a fitting socket. Where the required 
melt is obtained, the pipe and fitting shall be joined 
by inserting one into the other with applied force. 
Do not disturb the joint until cooled to ambient tem- 
perature. 


4.5 


4.6 
4.6.1 


4.6.2 


Trenchless Installation of Sewers 


The trenchless installation of sewers will be as fol- 
lows: 


(a) Preliminary Steps 
(i) Inspect the inside of the sewer line using a 
camera and recording device to ascertain 
the line condition. 


(п) Mark the details revealed by the video 
inspection including: 
1. The ground surface to show the loca- 
tion of the lateral tie of the city wye. 


2. Тһе line location with an arrow in the 
street pointing back at the lateral. 


3. The property denoting the lateral loca- 
tion. 


4. Тһе locations of the proposed excava- 
tions. 


(iii) Obtain utility line identification service con- 
tact information and all applicable permits. 


(b) Excavation 


In addition to the above markings, the local util- 
ity companies will mark utilities. Considera- 
tions are soil density; clearance from obstacles, 
utilities, and structures; location of bends, and 
water service locations. Excavations and 
shoring shall be in accordance with jurisdic- 
tional safety requirements. 

(c) Set Up 
Fuse the proper length of polyethylene pipe in 
accordance with ASTM F2620, or ASTM 
D3261 and fuse the end to a small length that is 
attached to the pulling head. A rod pusher cable 
is pushed through the damaged host pipe and 
attached to the pulling cable, which is then 
drawn through the pipe. The clevis end of the 
cable is attached to the pulling head. The 
pulling equipment is then set up according to 
the manufacturer’s instructions. 

(d) Pulling 
Pull the pulling head through. Once the pull is 
done, complete the connection to the existing 
piping. 

Cleanouts 

Plug 


Each cleanout fitting for cast-iron pipe shall consist 
of a cast-iron or brass body and an approved plug. 
Each cleanout for galvanized wrought-iron, galva- 
nized steel, copper, or brass pipe shall consist of a 
brass plug as specified in Table 1, or a standard 
weight brass cap, or an approved ABS or PVC plas- 
tic plug, or an approved stainless-steel cleanout or 
plug. Plugs shall have raised square heads or 
approved countersunk rectangular slots. 


Approved 


Each cleanout fitting and each cleanout plug, or cap 
shall be of an approved type. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


4.6.3  Watertight and Gastight 
Cleanouts shall be designed to be watertight and 
gastight. 
5 Testing and Inspection Requirements 
5.1 Media 
The piping ofthe building sewer shall be tested with 
water. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be 
permitted to require the removal of cleanouts, etc., to 
ascertain whether the pressure has reached all parts 
of the system. 
5.2 Water Test 
The system shall be tested by plugging the end of 
the building sewer at its points of connection to the 
public sewer or private sewage disposal system and 
completely filling the building sewer with water 
from the lowest to the highest point thereof. 
5.3 Inspections 
The completed piping shall be internally inspected 
by camera unless waived by the Administrative 
Authority. 
TABLE 1 
CLEANOUTS 
(See Section 4.6.1) 
NPS SIZE OF CLEANOUT | THREADS PER INCH 
(inches) 
1.5 1.5 11.5 
2 1.5 11.5 
2.5 2.5 8 
3 25 გ 
4 & larger 3.5 8 


Note: For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm 


Uniform Plumbing Code References 


The following sections of the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code 


apply. 

105.2 Required Inspections 

105.2.2 Other Inspections 

105.3 Testing of Systems 

301.2 Minimum Standards 

309.0 Workmanship 

312.0 Protection of Piping, Materials, and Structures 
314.0 Trenching, Excavation, and Backfill 
701.3 Drainage Fittings 

705.5.1.1. Butt Fusion Joints 

705.5.1.2 . Electro-Fusion Joints 

705.5.1.3 ^ Socket-Fusion Joints 

723.0 Building Sewer Test 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


IS 26 


The following standards from Tables 1701.1 and 1701.2 of 
the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code apply. 


Table 1701.1 Standards 


ASTM D2239 


ASTM D2683 


ASTM D3261 


ASTM F714 


ASTM F894 


ASTM F1055 


ASTM F2620 


Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (SIDR- 
PR) Based on Controlled Inside Diam- 
eter 


Socket-Type Polyethylene Fittings for 
Outside Diameter-Controlled Polyeth- 
ylene Pipe and Tubing 


Butt Heat Fusion Polyethylene (PE) 
Plastic Fittings for Polyethylene (PE) 
Plastic Pipe and Tubing 
Polyethylene (PE) Plastic Pipe (DR- 
PR) Based on Outside Diameter 


Polyethylene (PE) Large Diameter 
Profile Wall Sewer and Drain Pipe 


Electrofusion Type Polyethylene Fit- 
tings for Outside Diameter Controlled 
Polyethylene and Crosslinked Poly- 
ethylene (PEX) Pipe and Tubing 


Heat Fusion Joining of Polyethylene 
Pipe and Fittings 


Table 1701.2 Standards 


ASTM D2657 


IAPMO PS 25 


Heat Fusion Joining of Polyolefin Pipe 
and Fittings 

Metallic Fittings for Joining Polyeth- 
ylene Pipe for Water Service and Yard 
Piping 


453 


454 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


"The information contained in this appendix is not part of this American National Standard (ANS) and has not been 
processed in accordance with ANSI's requirements for an ANS. As such, this appendix may contain material that has 
not been subjected to public review or a consensus process. In addition, it does not contain requirements necessary 
for conformance to the standard." 


The following IAPMO Installation Standard is included here for the convenience of the users of the Uniform Plumb- 
ing Code. It is not considered as a part of the Uniform Plumbing Code unless formally adopted as such. This Instal- 
lation Standard is an independent, stand-alone document published by the International Association of Plumbing 
and Mechanical Officials and is printed herein by the expressed written permission of IAPMO. 


INSTALLATION STANDARD FOR PEX TUBING SYSTEMS 
FOR HOT- AND COLD-WATER DISTRIBUTION 


IAPMO IS 31-2022 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 
adopting ordinance. 


1 Scope tive material from the text. Notes to tables and fig- 
11 General ures are considered part of the table or figure and 


Я i Я ; itt i ts. 
11.1 This Standard specifies requirements for the instal- шише ан ае 


lation of SDR 9 CTS crosslinked polyethylene 1.3 Units of Measurement 


(PEX) tubing and fittings, including cold-expansion, SI units are the primary units of record in global 
crimp, press, and mechanical compression fittings, commerce. In this Standard, the inch/pound units are 
intended for hot- and cold-water distribution sys- shown in parentheses. The values stated in each 
tems within buildings. measurement system are equivalent in application, 


but each unit system is to be used independently. All 


Tbe Ти ашаарына references to gallons are to U.S. gallons. 


(a SDR 9 CTS PEX tubing complying with 
ASTM F876 and pressure-rated in accordance 


with PPI TR-3; and 2 Reference Publications 
(b) PEX fitting systems complying with This Standard refers to the following publications, 

(i) ASTM F877, for mechanical compression and where such reference is made, it shall be to the 
fittings and metal or plastic insert fittings current edition of those publications, including all 
with stainless steel press sleeves; amendments published thereto. 

(ii) ASTM F1807 or ASTM F2159, for metal 
or plastic insert fittings with copper crimp ASTM International 
rings; à | 

(1) ASTM F1960, for cold expansion fittings АЗИЕВ A еа P. bsp ES 
with PEX reinforced rings; or Tubing 

(iv) ASTM F2080, for cold expansion fittings 


ASTM F877 Standard Specification for 


with metal compression sleeves. Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) 


12 Terminology Hot- and Cold-Water Distribution 
In this Standard, Systems 
(a) "shall" is used to express a requirement, i.e., a ASTM F1807 Standard Specification for Metal 
provision that the user is obliged to satisfy to Insert Fittings Utilizing a Copper 
comply with the Standard; Crimp Ring, or Alternate Stainless 
(b) "should" is used to express a recommendation, Steel Clamps, for SDR9 Cross- 
but not a requirement; linked Polyethylene (PEX) Tubing 
(c) “may” is used to express an option or something and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised 
permissible within the scope of the Standard; Temperature (PE-RT) Tubing 
and ASTM F1960 Standard Specification for Cold 
(d) “can” is used to express a possibility or a capa- Expansion Fittings with PEX 
bility. Reinforcing Rings for Use with 
Notes accompanying sections of the Standard do not Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) 
specify requirements or alternative requirements; Polyethylene of Raised Tempera- 
their purpose is to separate explanatory or informa- ture (PE-RT) Tubing 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 455 


IS 31 


456 


ASTM F2080 Standard Specification for Cold- 
Expansion Fittings with Metal 
Compression-Sleeves for Cross- 
Linked Polyethylene (PEX) Pipe 
and SDR9 Polyethylene of Raised 
Temperature (PE-RT) Pipe 
Standard Specification for Plastic 
Insert Fittings Utilizing a Copper 
Crimp Ring, or Alternate Stain- 
less Steel Clamps for SDR9 
Cross-linked Polyethylene (PEX) 
Tubing and SDR9 Polyethylene 
of Raised Temperature (PE-RT) 
Tubing 

Standard Test Method for Out- 
door Weathering Exposure of 
Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) 
Tubing 


ASTM F2159 


ASTM F2657 


AWWA (American Water Works Association) 


AWWA C904 Cross-Linked Polyethylene (PEX) 
Pressure Tubing, % In. (13 mm) 
Through 3 In. (76 mm), for Water 
Service 


IAPMO (International Association of Plumb- 

ing and Mechanical Officials) 

IAPMO/ANSI 
UPC-1 Uniform Plumbing Code 

PPI (Plastics Pipe Institute) 


PPI TR-3 Policies and Procedures for 
Developing Hydrostatic Design 
Basis (HDB), Hydrostatic Design 
Stresses (HDS), Pressure Design 
Basis (PDB), Strength Design 
Basis (SDB), Minimum Required 
Strength (MRS) Ratings, and Cat- 
egorized Required Strength 
(CRS) for Thermoplastic Piping 
Materials or Pipe 


Abbreviations 

The following abbreviations apply in this Standard: 
CTS — copper tube size 

HDPE — high density polyethylene 

IC — insulation contact 

NTS — nominal tubing size 

PEX — crosslinked polyethylene 

SDR — standard dimension ratio 

UV — ultraviolet light 


4.1.1 


4.2 
4.2.1 


4.2.2 


4.2.3 


4.3 


4.4 


4.5 
4.5.1 


4.5.2 


General 
Tubing 
PEX tubing can be 


(a) pigmented throughout (1.е., with color); 

(b) non-pigmented (e.g., translucent or natural); or 
(c) coated with a pigmented layer. 

PEX tubing is typically available in NTS-1/4 to 
NTS-3. 


Before installation, the installer shall review the tub- 
ing markings and verify that 


(a) the standard designation(s) of the fittings to 
which the tube can be joined to is included in 
the markings; 

(b) it bears a certification mark from an accredited 
certification organization; and 

(c) pressure and temperature ratings meet or exceed 
that of the intended end-use. 

Fittings 

Cold-Expansion Fittings 

Cold-expansion fittings typically are made of brass, 

stainless steel, or sulfone; consist of an insert and a 

PEX reinforcing ring; and are available in NTS-3/8 

to NTS-3. 

Crimp or Press Insert Fittings 

Crimp or press insert fittings typically 

(a) are made of brass, stainless steel, or sulfone; 

(b) consist of an insert and a copper crimp ring or 
a stainless steel press ring 

(c) are available in NTS-3/8 to NTS-2 

Compression Fittings 

Compression (1.е., transition) fittings typically 

(a) are made of brass; and 

(b) consist of 
(i) anut, a compression ring, and an insert; ог 
01) an O-ring brass insert with a compression 

sleeve. 

(c) are available in NTS-1/4 to NTS-3. 

Installation 

Only fittings systems marked on the tubing shall be 

used for installation with that particular tubing. 

Tools 

Tools and tool accessories (e.g., tool heads) used for 

the installation of PEX tubing systems shall be in 

accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications 
and written instructions. 

Tubing Protection 

Abrasion 

PEX tubing passing through drilled or notched metal 

studs or metal joists, or hollow-shell masonry walls 

shall be protected from abrasion by elastomeric or 
plastic sleeves or grommets. 

Puncture 

Steel-plate protection shall be installed in accor- 

dance with the local plumbing code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


5.2 
5.2.1 


5.2.2 


5.3 
5.3.1 


5.3.2 
5.4 
5.4.1 


5.4.2 


Handling 
Receiving 
When receiving PEX tubing shipments, the receiver 


shall inspect and inventory each shipment, ensuring 
that there has been no loss or damage. In addition: 


(a) At the time of unloading, the markings of all 
tubing, fittings, and accessories shall be veri- 
fied to ensure that all items have been manu- 
factured in accordance with the applicable 
product Standard and appropriately certified. 

(b) An overall examination of the shipment shall be 
made. If the shipment is intact, ordinary inspec- 
tion while unloading shall be sufficient to ensure 
that the items have arrived in good condition. 

(c) If the load has shifted, has broken packaging, 
or shows evidence of rough treatment, each 
item shall be carefully inspected for damage. 

(d) The total quantities of each shipment (e.g., tub- 
ing, gaskets, fittings, and accessories) shall be 
checked against shipping records. 

(e) Any damaged or missing items shall be noted 
on the delivery slip. The carrier shall be noti- 
fied immediately, and a claim made in accor- 
dance with its instructions. 

(f) No damaged material shall be disposed of. The 
carrier shall recommend the procedure to follow. 

(g) Shortages and damaged materials are normally 
not reshipped without request. If replacement 
material is needed, it shall be reordered from 
the manufacturer, the distributor, or a manufac- 
turer's representative. 

Storage and UV Exposure 


PEX tubing and fittings shall be stored indoors and 
in its original packaging until the time of installa- 
tion. Appropriate precautions to protect the tubing 
from damage, impact, and punctures shall be taken. 


Accumulative exposure time to UV radiation during 
storage and installation shall not exceed the UV 
exposure limits recommended by the manufacturer 
or specified in ASTM F876. 


Note: ASTM F876 has four categories for UV-resis- 
tance, ranging from untested to 6 months of contin- 
uous exposure, as listed in the material designation 
code. 


Exposure to Heat 


PEX tubing and fittings shall not be exposed to open 
flames. 


PEX tubing shall not be exposed to temperatures 
exceeding 93 °C (200?F). 
Exposure to Chemicals 


Chemical compatibility (e.g., with common con- 
struction materials) shall be verified with the manu- 
facturer prior to direct contact. 


In general, petroleum- or solvent-based chemicals 
(e.g., paints, greases, pesticides, or sealants) shall 
not be allowed to come in direct contact with PEX 
tubing or fittings. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


6.2 


6.3 


6.4 
6.4.1 
6.4.1.1 


6.4.1.2 


IS 31 


Thermal Expansion and Contraction 
Horizontal Tubing Runs 


Thermal expansion and contraction forces on sus- 

pended horizontal runs of PEX tubing that can expe- 

rience a 22 °C (40°F) or greater change in temperature 

(operating temperature compared to ambient temper- 

ature) shall be controlled by a means of mitigating 

temperature-induced stresses to other parts of the 

water distribution system. Means for controlling ther- 

mal expansion and contraction include 

(a) loops; 

(b) offsets; 

(c) arms with rigid anchor points; and 

(d) supporting the tubing with continuous runs of 
CTS support channels with 

(1) rigid anchor points installed every 20 m (65 ft); 
and 

(п) proper strapping (e.g., 27 kg (60 Ib) straps or 
equivalent) spaced 1 m (3 ft) and rated for the 
maximum temperature and UV exposure of the 
PEX tubing application. 

Vertical Tubing Runs 


Thermal expansion and contraction forces on verti- 
cal runs of PEX tubing that pass through more than 
one floor and can experience a 22 °C (40°F) or 
greater change in temperature (operating tempera- 
ture compared to ambient temperature) shall be con- 
trolled by installing 


(а) ariser clamp at the top of every other floor; and 

(b) mid-story guides to maintain the alignment of 
the vertical tubing. 

Note: /nstalling riser clamps isolates expansion 

and contraction to two-floor intervals allowing the 

PEX tubing to naturally compensate for the expan- 

sion and contraction. 


Clearance 

Adequate clearance shall be provided between PEX 
tubing and the building structure (e.g., using bored 
holes and sleeves) to allow for free longitudinal 
movement of the tubing. 

Expansion Arms and Expansion Loops 
Expansion Arms (See Figure 1) 

Expansion arms shall be installed as illustrated in 
Figure 1. 

The minimum length of expansion arms shall be cal- 
culated using the following equation: 


LB = Cx Dx AL) 

where 

LB = length of flexible arm 

C = material constant (12 for PEX) 

D = nominal outside diameter of tubing 
AL = thermal expansion length 


457 


IS 31 


6.4.2 
6.4.2.1 


6.4.2.2 


7.1 


72 


73 


458 


Expansion Loops (See Figure 2) 


Expansion loops shall be installed at the mid-point 
between anchors, as illustrated in Figure 2. 


The minimum length of expansion loops shall be 
calculated using the equation in Section 6.4.1.2; 
however, the distance LB shall be divided into three 
sections, as illustrated in Figure 2. 


where 
L1 = ІВ ~ 5; and 
І2 = LIx2. 


Hangers апа Supports 
Vertical Tubing 
Vertical PEX tubing shall 


(a) be supported at each floor or as specified by the 
water-distribution system designer to allow for 
expansion and contraction; and 

(b) have mid-story guides. 

Horizontal Tubing 


Unless otherwise authorized by the authority having 
jurisdiction, suspended horizontal runs of PEX tub- 
ing 

(a) NTS-1 and smaller shall be supported every 0.8 

m (32 in), unless continuously supported by 

metallic CTS or V channels that 

0) are supported at intervals not exceeding 1.8 
m (6 ft); 

(i) have a maximum cantilever, measured 
from the support to the end ofthe CTS sup- 
port channel, of 0.5 m (1.5 ft); and 

(b) NTS-1-1/4 and larger shall be supported every 

1.2 m (4 ft), unless continuously supported by 

metallic CTS or V channels that 

(i) are supported at intervals not exceeding 2.4 
m (8 ft); and 

(п) have a maximum cantilever, measured 
from the support to the end ofthe CTS sup- 
port channel, of 0.5 m (1.5 ft). 

Anchors 


Anchors shall be 


(a) used to restrict PEX tubing movement; 

(b) made of materials that provide rigidity to the 
support system and utilize pipe clamps designed 
for plastic tubing capable of restraining the tub- 
ing; and 

(c) installed in accordance with Figures 1 or 2, as 
applicable (1.e., anchor distances and size of 
arms and offsets). 

Note: Anchors are typically installed every 20 m 

(65 ft). See Section 6. 


Joints and Connections 
Assembly Procedure 


The procedure for making joints shall be as speci- 
fied by the manufacturer. 


8.2 


9.2 


9.3 


10 
10.1 


10.2 
10.2.1 


10.2.2 


10.3 


10.4 


Concealed Joints 


PEX tubing systems manufactured in accordance 
with the applicable standards referenced in Section 
2 are deemed manufactured joints and may be 
installed in concealed spaces without the need for 
access panels. 


Clearances 
Gas Vents 


Except for double-wall B-vents, which require a 25 
mm (1 in) clearance, the clearance between gas 
appliance vents and PEX tubing shall be at least 150 
mm (6 in). 

Recessed Light Fixtures 


Except when the PEX tubing is protected with fiber- 
glass or closed-cell insulation or the recessed light is 
IC-rated, the clearance between recessed light fix- 
tures and PEX tubing shall be at least 300 mm (12 
in). 

Fluorescent Lighting 

When in direct view of the light source, the clear- 
ance between fluorescent lighting and PEX tubing 
shall be at least 1.5 m (5 ft). If the minimum clear- 
ance cannot be achieved, the PEX tubing shall be 
protected with a UV-blocking sleeve. 


Other Considerations 
Hot-Work Joints 


Hot-work joints (e.g., soldering, brazing, welding, 
and fusion-welding) shall be 


(a) made at least 500 mm (18 in) from PEX tubing 
in the same water line; and 

(b) performed prior to completing the PEX joints. 

Bending Radius 


The free (unsupported) bending radius for PEX tub- 
ing, measured at the outside of the bend, shall be not 
less than six times the actual outside diameter of the 
tubing, unless otherwise specified by the PEX man- 
ufacturer. Supports should be used to facilitate rigid 
bends and to alleviate stress on PEX joints when 
bends are needed in close proximity to such joints. 
Tighter bends may be used when the PEX tubing is 
uniformly bent (supported) around a curved bracket 
or other rigid fixture. In this case, the minimum out- 
side radius of the supported bend shall be as speci- 
fied by the PEX manufacturer. 

Directional Fittings 

Directional fittings (e.g., 90° and 45° elbows) should 
only be installed where necessary. 

Note: The flexible nature of PEX tubing allows for 
sweeping bends resulting in less fittings and joints. 
Direct Burial 

PEX tubing and fittings may be used in direct bur- 
ial applications when allowed in the manufacturer’s 
written installation instructions. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


10.5 


10.6 
10.6.1 


10.6.2 


10.6.3 


10.6.4 


10.7 


Note: AWWA C904 should be consulted for water 
service applications. 


Fire-Resistive Construction 


Manufacturer's installation instructions shall be con- 
sulted prior to installation of PEX tubing in fire 
resistive constructions. PEX tubing penetrating a 
wall or floor-and-ceiling fire-rated assembly shall 
include a means of passive fire protection in accor- 
dance with the local codes. 


Sizing and Flow Velocities 


PEX tubing shall be sized in accordance with 
IAPMO/ANSI UPC 1. 


Note: Potable water piping sizing is addressed in 
Chapter 6 and Appendix A of IAPMO/ANSI UPC 1. 


The tubing manufacturer’s pressure-loss data should 
be referenced when using Appendix A of 
IAPMO/ANSI UPC 1. In absence of such data, Fig- 
ures 3 and 4 shall be used. 


Flow velocities through the water distribution sys- 
tem, used for calculating flush tank and flush valve 
fixture units depending on the tubing sizes (see 
Table 1), shall not exceed 


(a) 3.0 m/s (10 ft/s) for cold-water distribution sys- 
tems; and 

(b) 2.4 m/s (8 ft/s) for hot-water distribution sys- 
tems. 

Note: 77e flow velocities in Items (a) and (b) 

account for the increased velocities through the fit- 

tings. 

Hot-water recirculation systems shall 


(a) be balanced to maintain adequate system tem- 
peratures; and 

(b) have flow velocities that do not exceed 0.6 m/s 
(2 ft/s) (see Table 2); and 

(c) use only PEX tubing designated for hot, chlori- 
nated water recirculation systems and rated for 
the maximum percentage of time during which 
the system is intended to be operated at elevated 
temperatures, in accordance with ASTM F876. 

Installation Testing 


Installation of PEX water distribution systems may 
be tested with air when 


(a) expressly allowed in the written instructions of 
the manufacturers of all plastic pipe and fittings 
installed at the time the PEX piping system is 
being tested; and 

(b) compressed air or other gas testing is not pro- 
hibited by the authority having jurisdiction. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


- CES 


Anchor мн М 


Апсһог роїпї lr 


Note: 
LB = C x N(D x AL) 
where 
LB = length of flexible arm 
C Е material constant (12 for РЕХ) 
D = nominal outside diameter of tubing 
AL = thermal expansion length 
FIGURE 1 
EXPANSION ARMS 


(See Sections 6.4.1 and 7.3) 


IS 31 


459 


IS 31 


TABLE 1 


CALCULATION OF FLUSH TANK AND FLUSH VALVE FIXTURE UNITS 


(See Section 10.6.3) 


FLOW VELOCITY: 3.0 m/s (10 ft/s) FLOW VELOCITY: 2.4 m/s (8 ft/s) 
NOMINAL TUBING 
SIZE FLOW VOLUME, FLUSH TANK FLUSH VALVE FLOW, FLUSH TANK FLUSH VALVE 
L/min (gpm) FIXTURE UNITS FIXTURE UNITS L/min (gpm) FIXTURE UNITS FIXTURE UNITS 
V 20.8 (5.5) 6 = 16.7 (4.4) 4 = 
% 41.6 (11.0) 15 = 33.3 (8.8) 11 em 
1 68.9 (18.2) 26 = 55.3 (14.6) 20 = 
1% 103.0 (27.2) 46 10 82.5 (21.8) 33 5 
1% 143.5 (37.9) 77 24 114.7 (30.3) 54 13 
2 246.1 (65.0) 200 91 196.8 (52.0) 135 52 
3 533.0 (140.8) 590 495 426.2 (112.6) 443 310 


TUBING SIZES, FLOWS, AND FRICTION LOSSES FOR 


TABLE 2 


HOT-WATER RECIRCULATION SYSTEMS 


(See Section 10.6.4) 


FLOW VELOCITY FLOW VOLUME FRICTION LOSSES AT 49°C (120°F) 
NOMINAL TUBING SIZE : | 
m/s (ft/s) L/min (gpm) kPa/m (psi/ft) 
№ 0.6 (2) 4.2 (1.1) 0.4411 (0.0195) 
54 0.6 (2) 8.3 (2.2) 0.2850 (0.0126) 
1 0.6 (2) 13.6 (3.6) 0.2081 (0.0092) 
1⁄4 0.6 (2) 20.4 (5.4) 0.1629 (0.0072) 
1^ 0.6 (2) 28.4 (7.5) 0.1335 (0.0059) 
2 0.6 (2) 48.8 (12.9) 0.0950 (0.0042) 
L 
AL/2, ,AL/2 


Anchor point / 


Anchor point 


Note: 

LB shall be calculated as specified in Figure 2 and divided into three sections, as follows: 
LB = LI-*(2x*xL2) 

where 

Ll = LB-5;and 

L2 = LIx2 


FIGURE 2 


460 


EXPANSION LOOPS 
(See Sections 6.4.2 and 7.3) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


FIGURE 3 


FIGURE 4 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


"The information contained in this appendix is not part of this American National Standard (ANS) and has not been 
processed in accordance with ANSI's requirements for an ANS. As such, this appendix may contain material that has 
not been subjected to public review or a consensus process. In addition, it does not contain requirements necessary 
for conformance to the standard." 


The following IAPMO Installation Standard is included here for the convenience of the users of the Uniform Plumb- 
ing Code. It is not considered as a part of the Uniform Plumbing Code unless formally adopted as such. This Instal- 
lation Standard is an independent, stand-alone document published by the International Association of Plumbing 
and Mechanical Officials and is printed herein by the expressed written permission of IAPMO. 


THRUST BLOCKING FOR RUBBER GASKETED AND 
SOLVENT CEMENT JOINTS 


IAPMO IS 33-2019°2 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 
adopting ordinance. 


1 Scope 2 Reference Publications 
1.1 General This Standard refers to the following publications, 
111 This Standard specifies requirements for the instal- and where such reference is made, it shall be to the 
lation of thrust blocking for ductile iron pipe with current edition of those publications, including all 
elastomeric gasketed joints and fittings and PVC amendments published thereto. 
piping with solvent cemented or elastomeric gas- 
keted joints intended for cold water building supply IAPMO/ANSI UPC-1 Uniform Plumbing Code 
and yard piping. 


1.1.2 Thrust blocks covered by this standard prevent sep- 3 Abbreviations 
aration of joints and pipe movement by transferring 
the resultant thrust force at a bend to the undisturbed The following abbreviations apply in this Standard: 
soil behind the thrust block. The bearing strength of PVC — polyvinyl chloride 
the soil is expressed in pounds per square foot. 
Therefore, the area behind the thrust block must 


: : 4 General 
engage enough soil area to resist the resultant thrust . х 
force at a change in direction. 4.1 Thrust Blocking for Rubber Gasket Joints 
12 Terminology In lines with rubber gasketed joints, thrust blocks shall 


In this Standard, be installed at all locations including: 


(a) "shall" is used to express a requirement, i.e., а (a) Changes in direction, as at tees and bends 


provision that the user is obliged to satisfy to (b) Changes in size, as at reducers 
comply with the Standard; (c) Stops, as at dead ends 
(b) "should" is used to express a recommendation, (d) Valves, where thrusts may be expected. 


but not a requirement; Note: See examples in Figure 1. 


(c) “may” is used to express an option or something 4.2 Sizing 


Issible within th fthe Standard; and => MS ; В 
оо нае а Piping shall be sized in accordance with the appli- 


(d) "can" is used to express a possibility or a capa- cable code or jurisdictional requirements. 


bility. 
шу . | Note: For example, Appendix A, "Recommended 
Notes accompanying sections of the Standard do not Rules for Sizing the Water Supply System", or Section 
specify requirements or alternative requirements; 610.0, "Size of Potable Water Piping" of 
their purpose is to separate explanatory or informa- IAPMO/ANSI UPC-1 may be use for sizing pipe. 


tive material from the text. Notes to tables and fig- 


ures are considered part of the table or figure and 4.3 Flow Velocity 


can be written as requirements. Flow velocity shall not exceed 8 fps (2.4 m/s) for 
13 Amendments PVC pipe or 10 fps (3m/s) for other pipe materials. 

Proposals for amendments to this Standard will be 44 Deflection 

processed in accordance with the standards-writing Elastomeric gasketed pipe may be deflected in accor- 

procedures of IAPMO. dance with the manufacturer’s recommendations pro- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 463 


IS 33 


4.5 


5.2.1 
5.2.1.1 


5.2.1.2 


5.2.1.3 


5.2.1.4 


464 


vided that it shall not be permanently staked or 
blocked to maintain this deflection. 

Maximum Working Pressure 

The pipe and fitting system shall be designed for the 


maximum working pressure in accordance with 
Table 1. 


Thrust Blocking Sizing and Calculations 

Sizes 

Thrust block sizes shall be based on the maximum 

line pressure, pipe size and the safe bearing load of 

the soil. 

Calculation Examples 

Thrust 

Example 1 

From Table 2, Thrust at Fittings in pounds at 100 

psi of Water Pressure, the thrust for a NPS 4 Dead 

End Tee at a pressure of 100 psi is 1620 Ib. 

Example 2 

The thrust for an NPS 4, Dead End Tee, at a pressure 

of 150 psi is 2430 Ib or 1.5 times the thrust found in 

Table 2. 

The calculation is as follows: 

(a) The thrust from Table 2, for an NPS 4, Dead 
End Tee, at 100 psi, is 1,620 Ib. 

(b) The actual pressure of the system is 150 psi. 

(c) Divide the actual pressure by the table pressure 
or 150 psi/100 psi is 1.5. 


Multiply the thrust from Table 2, for an NPS 4, 
Dead End Tee, at 100 psi, times the ratio of the 
actual/table pressure, or 1.5 times 1620 Ib for a 
thrust of 2430 Ib. 

Example 3 

From Table 3, Thrust at Fittings in Newtons at 689 
kPa of Water Pressure, the thrust for a DN 125, 90? 
Bend, at a pressure of 689 kPa is 15,757 N. 
Example 4 

The thrust for a DN 125, 90? Bend, at a pressure of 
861 kPa is 19,469 N or 1.25 times the force in Table 
3. 

The calculation is as follows 


(a) The thrust from Table 3, for a DN 127, 90? 
Bend at a pressure of 689 kPa, is 15,575 N. 


The actual pressure of the system 1s 861 kPa. 


(d) 


(b) 
(c) 


Divide the actual pressure by the table pressure 
or 861 kPa/689 kPa or 1.25. 

Multiply the thrust from Table 2, for a DN 125, 
90? Bend, at a pressure of 689 kPa times, the 
ratio of the actual/table pressure, or 1.25 times 
15,757 N for a thrust of 19,469 N. 

Note: 1000 N is equal to 1 kN for a thrust of 19.469 
kN. 


(d) 


5.2.2 


5.2.2.1 


5.2.2.2 


5.2.2.3 


5.2.2.4 


Thrust Block Bearing Area 

The thrust block bearing area is determined by 

dividing the thrust by the safe bearing load of the 

soil. 

Note: See examples in Figure 2 

Example 5 

From Table 4, Safe Bearing Loads of Various Soils 

the safe bearing load of sand is 2000 Ib/ft?. 

Example 6 

The thrust block bearing area for an NPS 4, Dead 

End Tee, at a pressure of 100 psi in sand is 0.81 ft’. 
The calculation is as follows 

(a) From Table 2, Thrust at Fittings in pounds at 
100 psi of Water Pressure, the thrust for a 4 in 


Dead End Tee at a pressure of 100 psi is 1620 

Ib. 

From Table 4 the safe bearing load of sand is 

2000 Ib/ft?. 

(c) Divide the thrust by the safe bearing load of 
sand, ог 1620 15/2000 Ib/f£? for a thrust block 
bearing area of 0.81 #2. 

Example 7 
The thrust block bearing area for an NPS 4, 
Dead End Tee at a pressure of 150 psi in sand is 
1.22 ft. 

The calculation is as follows: 


(a) The thrust for an NPS 4, Dead End Tee, at a 
pressure of 150 psi was found in Example 2 to 
be 2430 Ib. 


The soil type 1s sand and the safe bearing load 

of sand from Table 4 is 2000 1b/ft?. 

(c) The required bearing area of the thrust block is 
determined by dividing the thrust by the safe 
bearing load or 2430 16/2000 Ib/f£? for a thrust 
block bearing area of 1.22 ft’. 

Example 8 

The thrust block bearing area for a DN 125, 90? 

Bend, at a pressure of 861 kPa in Soft Clay is 

2.82 та? 

The calculation is as follows: 

(a) The thrust fora DN 125, 90° Bend at a pressure 
of 861 kPa was found in Example 4 to be 
19,469 N. 

(b) The soil condition is soft clay and the safe bear- 
ing load of soft clay from Table 4 is 48 kPa or 
48,000 N/m?. 

Note: 1 kPa = 1 kN/m = 1000 N/m? 

(c) The required block bearing area is determined 

by dividing the thrust by the safe bearing load 

or 19,469 N/48,000 N/ m? for a thrust block 

bearing area of 0.4 т. 


(b) 


(b) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


IS 33 


6 Testing Requirements 
6.1 Rubber Gasketed Joints 
Properly sized thrust blocks, either permanent or 
temporary, shall be installed at all required points 
before testing. When concrete thrust blocks are 
installed, wait at least 24 hours before pressure test- 
ing. 
6.2 Solvent Cement Joints 
The entire system shall be purged before testing to 
eliminate all solvent cement vapors and air. The sys- 
tem shall not be pressurized until the joints have 
cured (set) at least as long as recommended by the 
manufacturer. If the manufacturers recommendation 
is not available the cure times in Table 5 shall apply. 
Systems with solvent cement joints shall be pressure 
tested filled with water or other fluid. CAUTION: 
Water Test Only. 
7 Identification 
A label shall be fastened to the main electrical meter 
panel stating, “This structure has a nonmetallic 
water service". 
TABLE 1 
MAXIMUM WORKING PRESSURE FOR PIPE AND FITTING SYSTEM DESIGN 
(See Section 4.5) 
MAXIMUM WORKING SIZES 
PRESSURE kPa (psi) NPS DN PIPE FITTINGS 
1103 kPa (160 psi) 1/2 to 8 15 to 200 SDR 26 .. 
გ E i Ў Schedule 80 
1379 kPa (200 psi) 1/2 to 4 15 to 100 SDR 21 Schedule 40 
кшш 1/2 to 8 15 to 200 Schedule 80 
1724 kPa (250 psi) 1/2 to 3 15 to 80 SDR 17 Schedule 40 
SECUN 1/2 to 8 15 to 200 Schedule 80 
2172 kPa (315 psi) 1/2 to 1-1/2 15 to 40 SDR 13.5 Schedule 40 
საული 12 t04 15 to 100 | Schedule 80 
1103 kPa (160 psi) 5 to 8 125 to 200 Schedule 40 Schedule 40 
1517 kPa (220 psi) 2104 50 to 100 Schedule 40 ыы. 
დ pu Ё б а Schedule 80 
. Schedule 40 
2206 kPa (320 psi) 1/2 to 1-1/2 15 to 40 Schedule 40 
Schedule 80 
1103 kPa (160 psi) 5 to 8 125 to 200 Schedule 80 Schedule 40 
1517 kPa (220 psi) 2104 50 to 100 Schedule 80 Schedule 40 
2206 kPa (320 psi) 1/2 to 1-1/2 15 to 40 Schedule 80 Schedule 40 
1724 kPa (250 psi) 5 to 8 125 to 200 Schedule 80 Schedule 80 
2206 kPa (320 psi) 1/2 to4 15 to 100 Schedule 80 Schedule 80 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


465 


IS 33 


466 


TABLE 2 


THRUST AT FITTINGS IN POUNDS AT 100 psi OF WATER PRESSURE 
(See Sections 5.2.1.1, 5.2.1.2, and 5.2.2.2) 


PIPE SIZE 90° 45° 22-1/2° DEAD ENDS 
NPS BENDS BENDS BENDS AND TEES 
1-1/2 415 225 115 295 
2 645 350 180 455 
2-1/2 935 510 260 660 
3 1395 755 385 985 
3-1/2 1780 962 495 1260 
4 2,295 1245 635 1620 
2 3,500 1900 975 2,490 
6 4,950 2,710 1385 3,550 
8 8,300 4,500 2,290 5,860 
10 12,800 6,900 3,540 9,050 
12 18,100 9,800 5,000 12,800 
TABLE 3 


THRUST AT FITTINGS IN NEWTONS (N) AT 689 kPa OF WATER PRESSURE 
(See Sections 5.2.1.3, and 5.2.1.4) 


PIPE SIZE 90* 45° 22-1/2° DEAD ENDS 
DN BENDS BENDS BENDS AND TEES 
40 1847 1000 515 1315 
50 2870 1560 800 2025 
65 4160 2270 1160 3940 
80 6210 3360 1715 4385 
90 7925 4280 2205 5610 
100 10,215 5540 2815 7210 
125 15,575 8455 4340 11,080 
150 22,030 12,060 6165 15,800 
200 36,935 20,025 10,190 26,080 
250 56,960 30,705 15,755 40,275 
300 80,545 43,610 22,250 56,960 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


IS 33 


TABLE 4 
SAFE BEARING LOADS OF VARIOUS SOILS 
(See Sections 5.2.2.1, and 5.2.2.3 and 5.2.2.4) 


Safe Bearing Load 
SOIL Ibs/ft? (psf) kN/m? (kPa) 
Mulch, Peat, etc. 0 0 
Soft Clay 1000 48 
Sand 2000 96 
Sand and Gravel 3000 143 
Sand and Gravel Cement with Clay 4000 191 
Hard Shale 10,000 478 
TABLE 5 
MINIMUM CURE TIME, IN HOURS (h)* 
TEST PRESSURE FOR PIPE 
(See Section 6.2) 
DN 15 TO 32 DN 40 TO 80 DN 80 TO 200 
(NPS 1/2 TO 1-1/4) (NPS 1-1/2 TO 3) (NPS 3-1/2 TO 8) 
DN 15 DN 32 DN 40 DN 80 DN 90 DN 200 
(NPS 1/2) (NPS 1-1/2) (NPS 1-1/2) (NPS 1-1/2) (NPS 3-1/2) (NPS 8) 
TEMPERATURE ABOVE 1240 TO ABOVE 1240 TO ABOVE 1240 TO 
RANGEDURNG | UP სხ en 2549 kPa ДЕ fien en 2549 kPa Ur aab i 2549 kPa 
CURE PERIOD (180 TO 370 psi) (180 TO 370 psi) (180 TO 370 psi) 
60°F - 100°F 
(16°C-38°C) lh 6h 2h 12h 6h 24h 
40°F-60°F 
(4°C-16°C) 2h 12h 4h 24h 12h 48 h 
10?F- 40?F 
СЄ12°С+4°С) 8h 48 h 16h 96 h 48 h 8 days 
*]f gaps or loose fits are encountered in the system, double these cure times. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


467 


IS 33 


468 


FIGURE 1 
LOCATION OF THRUST BLOCKS 
(STANDARD AND METRIC COMBINED) 
A COMPARISON OF THRUST-BLOCK AREAS 
(See Section 4.1) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


IS 33 


MM. 
„әйе... : 
H i 
—— 
Clay Soil Clay Soil ` 
NPS 6 М NPS 10 
90° Вепа *  ' 90° Bend 
81 psi f : 86 psi 
— 
Sand 
DN 250 
90° Bend ; H 90* Bend 
1,501kPa ' ' 1,742 kPa 
FIGURE 2 


THRUST BLOCK BEARING AREA 
(See Section 5.2.2) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 469 


IS 33 


Uniform Plumbing Code References for 
Ductile Iron and PVC Pressure Building Supply 
and Exterior Cold-Water Piping 


The following sections of the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code 
apply to ductile iron and PVC pressure building supply and 
exterior cold-water piping. 


Chapter 3 


Chapter 6 


309.0 
312.0 


General Regulations 
Workmanship 
Protection of Piping, Materials, and Struc- 


tures 


313.0 
314.0 


604.0 


Hangers, Supports, and Anchors 
Trenching, Excavation, and Backfill 


Water Supply and Distribution 
Materials (water piping) 


Table 604.1 Materials for Building Supply and Water 
Distribution Piping and Fittings 


605.4 
605.12 
605.16.2 
609.0 


Abbreviations 


IAPMO 


UPC 


AWWA 
CSA 


Ductile Iron Pipe and Joints 

PVC Plastic Pipe and Joints 

Plastic Pipe to Other Materials 
Installation, Testing, Unions, and Location 


International Association of Plumbing 
and Mechanical Officials 


Uniform Plumbing Code published by 
IAPMO 


American Water Works Association 
Canadian Standards Association 


Applicable Standards. 


470 


ASME B16.4 


ASTM D1785 


ASTM D2241 


ASTM D2466 


ASTM D2467 


ASTM F1970 


AWWA C110 
AWWA C111 


Gray Iron Threaded Fittings Classes 
125 and 250 

Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic 
Pipe, Schedules 40, 80, and 120 

Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Pres- 
sure-Rated Pipe (SDR Series) 

Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic 
Pipe Fittings, Schedule 40 

Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) Plastic 
Pipe Fittings, Schedule 80 

Special Engineered Fittings, Appurte- 
nances or Valves for use in Poly 
(Vinyl Chloride) (PVC) or Chlori- 
nated Poly (Vinyl Chloride) (CPVC) 
Systems 

Ductile Iron and Gray-Iron Fittings 


Rubber-Gasket Joints for Ductile-Iron 
Pressure Pipe and Fittings 


AWWA C151 
AWWA C153 
AWWA C900 


AWWA C904 


AWWA C907 


IAPMO/ 
ANSI UPC-1 


Ductile-Iron Pipe, Centrifugally Cast 
Ductile-Iron Compact Fitting 
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) Pressure 
Pipe and Fabricated Fittings, 4 in. 
through 12 in. (100 mm through 300 
mm) 

Crosslinked Polyethylene (PEX) Pres- 
sure Tubing, % in. through 3 In. (13 
mm through 76 mm), for Water Serv- 
ice 

Injection-Molded Polyvinyl Chloride 
(PVC) Pressure Fittings, 4 In, through 
12 in (100 mm through 300 mm) for 
Water, Wastewater and Reclaimed 
Water Service 


Uniform Plumbing Code 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


The information contained in this appendix is not part of this American National Stan- 
dard (ANS) and has not been processed in accordance with ANSI's requirements for 
an ANS. As such, this appendix may contain material that has not been subjected to 
public review or a consensus process. In addition, it does not contain requirements 
necessary for conformance to the standard. 


The following Sections B414-22, B417-22, B421C-22, B422C-22, SR614-22, TR418- 
22, TR420-22, are excerpted in their entirety from the 2022 Handbook for the Instal- 
lation of Ceramic, Glass, and Stone Tile Installations, with permission from the Tile 
Council of North America, Inc. 


In addition to these, the TCNA Handbook, includes 200+ methods for tile and stone 
installation based on various installation requirements and application types, as well 
as product selection guides, field and installation requirements, and guidelines for 
wet areas. For a complete copy, visit www.TCNAtile.com. 


For the following standards, refer to the complete copy of the 2022 TCNA Handbook 
for Ceramic, Glass, and Stone Tile Installations: B441-22 [Wood or Metal Studs, 
Backer Board, Mortar Bed Walls (One Coat Method), Mortar Bed Floor, Ceramic Tile]; 
B415-22 (Wood or Metal Studs, Cement Backer Board or Fiber-Cement Backer Board 
Walls, Mortar Bed Floor, Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile); B420-22 (Wood or Metal Studs, 
Coated Glass Mat Water-Resistant Gypsum Backer Board Walls, Mortar Bed Floor, 
Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile); B426-22 (Wood or Metal Studs, Cementitious-Coated 
Extruded Foam Backer Board Walls, Mortar Bed Floor, Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile); 
B431-22 (Wood or Metal Studs, Fiber-Reinforced Water-Resistant Gypsum Backer 
Board Walls, Mortar Bed Floor, Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile); B421-22 (Solid Backing, 
Bonded Waterproof Membrane, Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile); and B422-22 (Solid Back- 
ing, Bonded Waterproof Membrane, Integrated). 


2022 TCNA HANDBOOK 
FOR CERAMIC, GLASS, AND 
STONE TILE INSTALLATION 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 
adopting ordinance. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 471 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


NOTICE OF DISCLAIMER AND LIMITATION OF LIABILITY 


This publication is provided as a guide, and all of the information it contains is pro- 
vided ‘as is’ without warranty of any kind, whether express or implied. All implied 
warranties, including, without limitation, implied warranties of merchantability, fit- 
ness for a particular purpose, and non-infringement, are hereby expressly dis- 
claimed. 


Publisher expressly disclaims any obligation to obtain and include information other 
than that presented herein resulting from the handbook committee consensus 
process. This information does not purport to address safety issues or applicable 
regulatory requirements associated with its use. It is the responsibility of the user 
of this information to review any applicable codes and other regulations and any 
site specific conditions in connection with the use of this information. Publisher 
expressly makes no representations or warranties regarding use of this information 
and compliance with any applicable statute, rule or regulation. 


The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions appro- 
priate for the activities herein and to avoid all potential hazards. Such precautions 
are generally not listed herein and are outside the scope of this document. 


Under no circumstances will publisher be liable to any person or business entity for 
any damages, including without limitation any and all direct, indirect, special, inci- 
dental, consequential, or exemplary damages, resulting, in whole or in part, from 
any use of, reference to, or reliance upon this publication, even if advised of the 
possibility of such damages. The foregoing limitation of liability is a fundamental 
element of the use of this information and the information would not be offered by 
the publisher without such limitation. 


472 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SHOWER RECEPTORS 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


B414-22 


* Wood or Metal Studs 

* Mortar Bed Walls 

* Mortar Bed Floor 

* Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile 


Ceramic or glass tile 


Bond coat 
Mortar bed 
Scratch coat 
Metal lath 


Vapor retarder 
membrane 


Waterproof membrane 
option* 


Wood or metal 
studs 
Flexible sealant 


Reinforced mortar 
bed 


Shower pan membrane 


Sloped fill 
under shower 
pan membrane 


Pea gravel or 
other weep 
protection 


* Use of a waterproof membrane on walls is optional. 
See membrane options. 


Shower receptors, curbs, seats, etc., 
must be properly waterproofed and 
installed to avoid water damage to 
adjacent building materials. See 
common shower configurations section. 


Recommended Uses 
* For showers that do not have prefabricated receptors. 


* For areas where wall flatness is critical, such as when tiles 
with any edge longer than 15" are specified. 


Environmental Exposure Classifications 
e Resl, 2, 3, 5; Соті, 2, 3, 5. 
* For Res4 and Com4, see SR614. 


* For installations that may be exposed to staining, specify 
tile and grout suitable for exposure. Consult product man- 
ufacturers; see also “Product Selection Guides." 


* For installations that may be exposed to mild chemical 
attack, specify epoxy grout and tile suitable for exposure. 
For greater resistance to chemical exposure, also specify an 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


epoxy bonding material. Consult product manufacturers; 
see also “Product Selection Guides.” 

Limitations 

* Maximum mortar bed thickness with scratch coat (wood or 
metal studs) not to exceed 112". 

* Maximum stud spacing 16" on center. 

Membrane Options 

* A vapor retarder membrane (A108.02-3.8) is required in 
order to prevent moisture intrusion and protect adjacent 
building materials. 


A waterproof membrane (A118.10) may be additionally 
specified for walls to further prevent moisture intrusion and 
protect adjacent building materials. Specifier shall indicate 
if complete waterproofing of walls is required, including 
treatment at termination points. 


Check with membrane manufacturer for suitability for 
applicable conditions, as not all membranes are suitable for 
steam, high-temperature and/or chemical exposure, or exte- 
rior use. 


When glass tile is used, consult glass tile manufacturer for 
membrane options and recommendations. 


Requirements 
* Wood studs—dry and well-braced, minimum depth 3%". 


* Metal studs—well-braced; 20 gauge (0.033") or heavier; 
minimum depth 3^" for residential applications or 374" for 
commercial applications. 


e Mortar bed thickness (with scratch coath—*4" minimum to 
1% * maximum (wood or metal studs). 


* Vapor retarder membrane behind mortar bed must lap over 
shower pan membrane. 


* Slope shower pan membrane 1⁄4" per foot to weep holes in 
drain. 


* Turn shower pan membrane up walls a minimum of 3" 
above shower curb (6" above floor in showers without 
curbs). 


* Surround drain with pea gravel or other weep protection to 
prevent mortar from blocking weep holes. 


Materials 


* Multiple options exist for membranes, mortars, grouts, 
and other materials and must be clearly specified to be 
included. If not specifically indicated, optional materials 
are not included and mortar/grout choice defaults to 
minimum performance specification indicated. Con- 
sider each system component and intended use to deter- 
mine minimum requirements and to specify options. 
Ceramic tile—ANSI A137.1. 

Glass tile, when used—ANSI A137.2; see also “Glass Tile 
Selection and Installation Guide," and consult tile manu- 
facturer for environmental exposure classification recom- 
mendations. Not all glass tiles are suitable. 

Cementitious grout —ANSI A118.6 or better ог ISO CG1 
or better. When glass tile 1s used, specify grout designated 
by tile and grout manufacturers. 


473 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


SHOWER RECEPTORS 


* Epoxy grout, when used—ANSI A118.3 or ISO RG. 

* Cementitious bond coat—portland cement paste on a mor- 
tar bed that is still workable. For a cured mortar bed, follow 
recommendations below to select appropriate bonding mor- 
tar: 

* When a waterproof membrane is not used—ANSI A118.1 
or better or ISO СІ or better. 

* When a waterproof membrane is used—ANSI A118.4 or 
better or ISO C2S1 or better unless ANSI A118.1 or ISO 
Cl is recommended by membrane manufacturer. 

* When porcelain tile is used—ANSI A118.4 or better or 
ISO C2 or better. 

* When glass tile is used, specify mortar designated by tile 
and mortar manufacturers. Bond coat color will impact 
the final appearance of translucent glass tile. Specifier 
shall confirm bond coat color is acceptable. 

* Epoxy bond coat, when used—ANSI A118.3 or ISO R1 or 
better. 

* When glass tile is used, specify epoxy bond coat desig- 
nated by tile and bond coat manufacturers. Bond coat 
color will impact the final appearance of translucent glass 
tile. Specifier shall confirm bond coat color is acceptable. 

e Vapor retarder membrane—ANSI A108.02-3.8. 

* Waterproof membrane, when used—ANSI A118.10. 

* Mortar bed, metal lath, and cleavage membrane— ANSI 
A108.1A. 

* Flexible mildew-resistant sealant—AS TM C920. 

* Shower pan membrane—local building code. 

* Metal studs—ASTM C645. 

Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 

* See "Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 
design. 

* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 

Preparation by Other Trades 

* Wall framing shall meet the general framing requirements 
of ANSI A108.11-4.0-4.3. 

* Apply blocking between the studs to support the shower 
pan membrane. 

Movement Joint (architect must specify type of joint 

and show location and details on drawings) 

* Movement joints—mandatory according to EJ171. 

* When glass tile is used, adhere to more frequent placement 
recommendations within the ranges listed in EJ171. 

Installation Specifications 

* Shower pan membrane—ANSI A108.01-3.6. 

* Tile—ANSI A108.1A, .1B, or .1C. A108.1B required if 
waterproof membrane or epoxy bond coat to be used. 


474 


e Glass tile—ANSI A108.14, .15, .16, or manufacturer's 
directions. 

e Cementitious grout —ANSI A108.10. 

* Epoxy mortar/grout —ANSI A108.6. 

* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A108.13. 

* Movement Joints—EJ171 and ASTM C1193. 

Notes 


* Test shower pan membrane and drainage fitting for leaks 
before commencing tilework. 


* Materials adversely affected by moisture in areas immedi- 
ately adjacent to showers, tubs, and roman tubs should be 
properly protected. 


* A sloped portland cement mortar fill or approved preformed 
slope may be used under shower pan membrane when sub- 
floor is not sloped to drain. 

* All horizontal surfaces, for example shower seats, sills, 
curbs, etc., must slope towards drain or other surface sloped 
toward drain. Where present, waterproofing also must be 
sloped. 

* When glass tile is used, see “Glass Tile Selection and Instal- 
lation Guide," and consult manufacturer for recommenda- 
tions and requirements. 


* For curbless shower receptor, see B421C and B422C. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TILE TUBS AND FOUNTAINS 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


B417-22 


* Concrete Tank 
* Mortar Bed 


Ceramic or glass tile 
Bond coat 

Mortar bed 

Scratch coat (if needed) 
Metal lath 

Flexible sealant 
Waterproof membrane 
Concrete Tank 
Reinforcing 


Pea gravel or 
other weep 
protection 


Weep holes 


* Wood Form 
* Mortar Bed 


Ceramic or glass tile 
Bond coat 

Studs or cementitious 
base for curbing 
Mortar bed 

Scratch coat 

Metal lath 

Waterproof membrane 
Exterior Glue plywood 


RRR A RRR 
დააა 


Blocking 
3/4” to 1-1/4” 4 


* Wood Curb 
* Mortar Bed 


Ceramic or glass tile 
Bond coat 

Mortar bed 
Waterproof membrane 
Reinforcing 

Flexible sealant 


* Concrete Curb 
* Mortar Bed 


Requirements 


* Waterproof membrane—slope membrane И" per foot to 


weep holes in drain. 


* Wood framing, when used, should be pressure treated and 


designed to resist deflection and movement. 
Preparation by Other Trades 


* Test tank, membrane, and drainage fittings for leaks before 


starting tilework. 
Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 


* See “Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 


design. 


* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 


Installation Materials. 
Installation Methods 
* Attach metal lath only above water line. 
* Floor—follow F121. 
* Walls—follow W221. 
Installation Specifications 
* Tile—ANSI A108.1A, IB, ІС. 


* Glass tile—ANSI A108.14, .15, .16, or manufacturer's 


directions. 
e Grout —ANSI A108.10. 
* Movement Joints—EJ171 and ASTM C1193. 


Ceramic or glass tile 
Bond coat 
Mortar bed 


Waterproof 
membrane 


Studs or cementitious 
base for curbing 


Reinforcing 


ARS >. 
* PEN 


| Concrete curb 


Wood curb 


Exterior glue 
plywood 


Note: This detail reflects both concrete and wood substrates. Specify one or the other. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


475 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


CURBLESS SHOWER RECEPTORS 


B421C-22 


* Solid Backing (wall) 

* Concrete Substrate (floor) 

* Bonded Waterproof Membrane 
* Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile 


| .—— Ceramic or glass tile 
Cementitious 
bond coat 


Bonded waterproof membrane 
— continuous to full height 
of tile assembly 


Solid backing 
Flexible sealant 
Sloped mortar bed 


Bonded waterproof membrane 


Mortar bed bond coat 
or cleavage membrane 


High point 


Shower receptors, curbs, 

seats, etc., must be properly 
waterproofed and installed to avoid 
water damage to adjacent building 
materials. 

See common shower configuration 
section. 


For mortar beds over 65 s.f., wire 
reinforcing is required. 


Mortar bed 
bond coat Weep holes with Depressed 
or cleavage pea gravel or concrete 
membrane 


other weep protection 


Recommended Uses 

* For construction of a shower without a curb. 

Environmental Exposure Classifications 

e Кеѕ1, 2, 3; Coml, 2 

e May be suitable for Com3, Res5, and Com5 as determined 
by membrane and backing material manufacturers. 

* For Res4 and Com4, see SR613 and SR614. 

* For installations that may be exposed to staining, specify 
tile and grout suitable for exposure. Consult product man- 
ufacturers; see also “Product Selection Guides." 

* For installations that may be exposed to mild chemical 
attack, specify epoxy grout and tile suitable for exposure. 
Consult product manufacturers; see also “Product Selection 
Guides." 

Limitations 

* Facilitates construction of a curbless shower without adding 
floor height at restroom entryway, but does not inherently 
comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Stan- 
dards for Accessible Design. Follow ADA where ADA 
compliance is required or desired. 

* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable limitations 
based on type of backing used—W201, W202E, №2021, 
W211, W221, W222, W231/W241, W243, W244C, 
W244E, W244F, W245, W246, and W247. 

Requirements 

* When glass tile is used, consult glass tile manufacturer for 
tile suitability over non-absorptive surface. 


476 


* Bonded waterproof membrane must be continuous, includ- 
ing at changes in plane. Follow membrane manufacturer's 
requirements for corners, seaming, and overlap. 


Waterproof membrane inside shower area must extend to 
full height of tile assembly. Also, the floor and wall water- 
proofing must continue outside the immediate shower area 
one foot beyond the high point of the floor, but not beyond 
the tiled area. Additional waterproofing of floor and/or 
walls outside the shower area may be needed to effectively 
contain and evacuate shower water and splash water and to 
protect building materials. When additional waterproofing 
of floor and/or walls outside the shower area is desired or 
required, the building design professional must specify all 
areas to be waterproofed and indicate membrane termina- 
tion points. 


A secondary drain may be required outside the immediate 
shower area to facilitate evacuation of shower water and 
splash water that is not contained in the shower area due to 
curbless design. When required or desired, building design 
professional must specify type and location of secondary 
drain. 


High point of the floor must be outside the shower area, 1.е., 
beyond shower door or curtain, to facilitate evacuation of 
shower water and splash water that is not contained in the 
shower area due to curbless design. Location of the high 
point of the floor is especially critical when secondary drain 
is not included outside the shower area. 


* Surround drain with pea gravel or other weep protection to 
prevent mortar from blocking weep holes. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CURBLESS SHOWER RECEPTORS 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable require- 
ments based on type of backing used. 


* Slope mortar bed 4" per foot toward drain and follow mem- 
brane manufacturer's instructions for connecting membrane 
to drain. 


Materials 


* Multiple options exist for membranes, mortars, grouts, 
and other materials and must be clearly specified to be 
included. If not specifically indicated, optional materials 
are not included and mortar/grout choice defaults to 
minimum performance specification indicated. Con- 
sider each system component and intended use to deter- 
mine minimum requirements and to specify options. 
Ceramic tile—ANSI A137.1. 

Glass tile, when used—ANSI A137.2; see also “Glass Tile 

Selection and Installation Guide," and consult tile manu- 

facturer for environmental exposure classification recom- 

mendations. Not all glass tiles are suitable. 

e Cementitious grout—ANSI A118.6 or better or ISO CG1 
or better. When glass tile 1s used, specify grout designated 
by tile and grout manufacturers. 

* Epoxy grout, when used—ANSI A118.3 or ISO RG. 

* Cementitious bond coat: 

e ANSI A118.4 or better or ISO C2S1 or better unless 


ANSI A118.1 or ISO СІ is recommended by membrane 
manufacturer. 


* When glass tile is used, specify mortar designated by tile 
and mortar manufacturers. Bond coat color will impact 
the final appearance of translucent glass tile. Specifier 
shall confirm bond coat color is acceptable. 


* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A118.10 and recommended 
by manufacturer of membrane for use over backing type in 
intended application. 


* Flexible mildew-resistant sealant—ASTM C920. 
Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 


* See “Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 
design. 

* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 


Preparation by Other Trades/Backer Board Installers 


* Depressed slab by others. Depressed area must extend 
beyond shower area to facilitate a finished floor installation 
that effectively evacuates shower water and splash water, 
which are often difficult to contain within a curbless 
shower. 

* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable prepara- 
tions by other trades and backer board installers. 

* Maximum allowable variation in the tile substrate—for tiles 
with all edges shorter than 15", maximum allowable varia- 
tion is И" in 10' from the required plane, with no more than 
Yo" variation in 12" when measured from the high points in 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


the surface. For tiles with at least one edge 15" in length, 
maximum allowable variation is 14" in 10' from the required 
plane, with по more than 146" variation in 24" when meas- 
ured from the high points in the surface. 


* Center backer board end or edge joints on framing and stag- 
ger joints in adjacent rows so four corners do not come 
together within the same plane. Space panel ends and edges 
in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 


Movement Joint (architect must specify type of joint 
and show location and details on drawings) 


* Movement joints—mandatory according to EJ171. 


* When glass tile is used, adhere to more frequent placement 
recommendations within the ranges listed in EJ171. 


Installation Specifications 

* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A108.13. 

* Tile—ANSI A108.5. 

* Glass tile—manufacturer’s directions. 

* Cementitious grout —ANSI A108.10. 

* Epoxy grout—ANSI A108.6. 

* Movement Joints—EJ171 and ASTM C1193. 
Notes 


* Test shower pan membrane/waterproof membrane and 
drainage fitting for leaks before commencing tilework. 


* Materials adversely affected by moisture in areas immedi- 
ately adjacent to showers, tubs, and roman tubs should be 
properly protected. 

* All horizontal surfaces, for example shower seats, sills, 
curbs, etc., must slope towards drain or other surface sloped 
toward drain. Where present, waterproofing also must be 
sloped. 

* When glass tile is used, see “Glass Tile Selection and Instal- 
lation Guide," and consult manufacturer for recommenda- 
tions and requirements. 


* Follow applicable plumbing and building codes. 


477 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


CURBLESS SHOWER RECEPTORS 


B422C-22 


* Solid Backing (wall) 

* Concrete Substrate (floor) 

* Bonded Waterproof Membrane 
* Ceramic Tile, Glass Tile 


Ceramic or glass tile 
Cementitious bond coat 
Solid backing 


Bonded waterproof membrane 
continuous to full height 
of tile assembly 


Flexible sealant 


flange 


Shower receptors, curbs, 

seats, etc., must be properly 
waterproofed and installed to 
avoid water damage to adjacent 
building materials. See common 
shower configurations section. 


Bonded For mortar beds over 65 s.f., 
Siopau monar рва waterproof wire reinforcing is required. 
Integrated membrane 
bonding 


High point 


4 


7 


Mortar bed bond coat or 
cleavage membrane 


Recommended Uses 

* For construction of a shower without a curb. 

Environmental Exposure Classifications 

e Кеѕ1, 2, 3; Coml, 2 

* May be suitable for Com3, Res5, and Com5 as determined 
by membrane and backing material manufacturers. 


* For Res4 and Com4, see SR613 and SR614. 


* For installations that may be exposed to staining, specify 
tile and grout suitable for exposure. Consult product man- 
ufacturers; see also “Product Selection Guides." 


* For installations that may be exposed to mild chemical 
attack, specify epoxy grout and tile suitable for exposure. 
Consult product manufacturers; see also “Product Selection 
Guides." 


Limitations 


* Facilitates construction of a curbless shower without adding 
floor height at restroom entryway, but does not inherently 
comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Stan- 
dards for Accessible Design. Follow ADA where ADA 
compliance is required or desired. 

* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable limitations 
based on type of backing used—W201, W202E, №2021, 
W211, W221, W222, W231/W241, W243, W244C, 
W244E, W244F, W245, W246, and W247. 


478 


Depressed 
concrete 


Requirements 


* When glass tile is used, consult glass tile manufacturer for 
tile suitability over non-absorptive surface. 


* Bonded waterproof membrane must be continuous, includ- 
ing at changes in plane. Follow membrane manufacturer's 
requirements for corners, seaming, and overlap. 


* Waterproof membrane inside shower area must extend to 
full height of tile assembly. Also, the floor and wall water- 
proofing must continue outside the immediate shower area 
one foot beyond the high point of the floor, but not beyond 
the tiled area. Additional waterproofing of floor and/or 
walls outside the shower area may be needed to effectively 
contain and evacuate shower water and splash water and to 
protect building materials. When additional waterproofing 
of floor and/or walls outside the shower area is desired or 
required, the building design professional must specify all 
areas to be waterproofed and indicate membrane termina- 
tion points. 


A secondary drain may be required outside the immediate 
shower area to facilitate evacuation of shower water and 
splash water that is not contained in the shower area due to 
curbless design. When required or desired, building design 
professional must specify type and location of secondary 
drain. 


* High point ofthe floor must be outside the shower area, 1.е., 
beyond shower door or curtain, to facilitate evacuation of 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CURBLESS SHOWER RECEPTORS 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


shower water and splash water that is not contained in the 
shower area due to curbless design. Location of the high 
point ofthe floor is especially critical when secondary drain 
is not included outside the shower area. 


* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable require- 
ments based on type of backing used. 


* Slope mortar bed 4" per foot toward drain and follow mem- 
brane and integrated bonding flange manufacturer's instruc- 
tions for connecting membrane to integrated bonding 
flange. 


Materials 


* Multiple options exist for membranes, mortars, grouts, 
and other materials and must be clearly specified to be 
included. If not specifically indicated, optional materials 
are not included and mortar/grout choice defaults to 
minimum performance specification indicated. Con- 
sider each system component and intended use to deter- 
mine minimum requirements and to specify options. 
Ceramic tile—ANSI A137.1. 

Glass tile, when used—ANSI A137.2; see also “Glass Tile 

Selection and Installation Guide," and consult tile manu- 

facturer for environmental exposure classification recom- 

mendations. Not all glass tiles are suitable. 

e Cementitious огош —ANSI A118.6 or better or ISO CG1 
or better. When glass tile 1s used, specify grout designated 
by tile and grout manufacturers. 

* Epoxy grout, when used—ANSI A118.3 or ISO RG. 

* Cementitious bond coat: 

e ANSI A118.4 or better or ISO C2S1 or better unless 


ANSI A118.1 or ISO C1 is recommended by membrane 
manufacturer. 


* When glass tile is used, specify mortar designated by tile 
and mortar manufacturers. Bond coat color will impact 
the final appearance of translucent glass tile. Specifier 
shall confirm bond coat color is acceptable. 


* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A118.10 and recommended 
by manufacturer of membrane for use over backing type in 
intended application. 


* Flexible mildew-resistant sealant—ASTM C920. 
Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 


* See “Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 
design. 

* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 

Preparation by Other Trades/Backer Board Installers 

* Depressed slab by others. Depressed area must extend 
beyond shower area to facilitate a finished floor installation 
that effectively evacuates shower water and splash water, 
which are often difficult to contain within a curbless 
shower. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


* Refer to appropriate wall method for applicable prepara- 
tions by other trades and backer board installers. 


* Maximum allowable variation in the tile substrate—for tiles 
with all edges shorter than 15," maximum allowable varia- 
tion is 1⁄4" in 10’ from the required plane, with no more than 
Yo" variation in 12" when measured from the high points in 
the surface. For tiles with at least one edge 15" in length, 
maximum allowable variation is 14" in 10' from the required 
plane, with no more than 146" variation in 24" when meas- 
ured from the high points in the surface. 


Center backer board end or edge joints on framing and stag- 
ger joints in adjacent rows so four corners do not come 
together within the same plane. Space panel ends and edges 
in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 


Movement Joint (architect must specify type of joint 
and show location and details on drawings) 


* Movement joints—mandatory according to EJ171. 


* When glass tile is used, adhere to more frequent placement 
recommendations within the ranges listed in EJ171. 


Installation Specifications 

* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A108.13. 

* Tile—ANSI A108.5. 

* Glass tile—manufacturer’s directions. 

* Cementitious grout —ANSI A108.10. 

* Epoxy grout—ANSI A108.6. 

* Movement Joints—EJ171 and ASTM C1193. 
Notes 


* Test shower pan membrane/waterproof membrane and 
drainage fitting for leaks before commencing tilework. 


* Materials adversely affected by moisture in areas immedi- 
ately adjacent to showers, tubs, and roman tubs should be 
properly protected. 

* All horizontal surfaces, for example shower seats, sills, 
curbs, etc., must slope towards drain or other surface sloped 
toward drain. Where present, waterproofing also must be 
sloped. 

* When glass tile is used, see “Glass Tile Selection and Instal- 
lation Guide," and consult manufacturer for recommenda- 
tions and requirements. 


* Follow applicable plumbing and building codes. 


479 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


COMMON SHOWER CONFIGURATIONS 


Mortar Curb 


Ceramic tile 
Bond coat 
Mortar bed 


Shower pan 
membrane 


Studs or cementitious 
base for curbing 


Reinforcing 


Sloped fill under shower 
pan membrane 


Wire reinforced 
mortar bed 


Preformed Curb 


Ceramic tile 

Bond coat 

Preformed curb 
Shower pan membrane 
Studs or cementitious 
base for curbing 
Noncorrosive spiral 
nail/washer fastener 
Flexible sealant 


C ZE 7A 


[—H P duc ბ 


DS» DDZ SMO УУУУ 
LL LLLLL/ID 


Flexible sealant 


Sloped fill under 
shower pan membrane 


Wire reinforced 
mortar bed 


*Note: Construct curb such that membrane on top of curb (shower pan 
membrane or bonded waterproof membrane) is sloped toward drain. 


Solid Curb 


Reinforced 
mortar bed 


aVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVaVa Va: + 


Ceramic tile 


Bond coat 


Continuous bonded 
waterproof membrane 


Solid curb 


4 A ДИР A ee LON 
L ს ს ს ს ს ს ს ს ს ს T 


Alternate Receptor Base 


Wood or metal stud 


Ceramic or natural 
stone tile 


Bond coat 
Backer board 


Folded shower pan 
membrane 

Wall mortar flush 
with backer board 


Drawing depicts use of wall mortar in lieu 

of shimming out backer board or notching 

studs to accommodate thickness of folds 

of shower pan membrane. Vapor retarder or 
waterproof membrane as required (now shown). 


Wire reinforced 
mortar bed 


Sloped fill under 
shower membrane 


480 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


COMMON SHOWER CONFIGURATIONS TCNA HANDBOOK 


1. Construct curb such that 
waterproof membrane on top 
side of curb is sloped toward 
the drain 


2. Fasteners - min. 3" 
above curb 


3. Shower pan membrane is 
sloped min. 1/4" per foot 
to drain, folded up walls 

min. 3" above curb, and 

extends to floor outside of 
shower. 


Shower Pan Membrane 
at Curb/Jamb 


Outside view 


Inside view 


1. Space, tape, seal, etc., backer board 
per manufacturer's requirements, 
including for bottom edge of board. 


2. Because of varying requirements, 
vapor retarder behind backer board 
not shown. Include and install vapor 
retarder when and as required by 
building code and backer board ; 
manufacturer. Backer Board Installation 


3. Fasteners - Min. 3" above curb Over Shower Pan Membrane 
4. Shower pan membrane is sloped 

1/4" per foot to drain, folded up 

walls min. 3" above curb, and 

extends to floor outside of shower. 


5. Wire mesh for curb - Per ANSI 


6. Construct curb such that waterproof 
membrane on top side of curb is 
sloped toward the drain. 


1. Construct shower seat such that bonded 
waterproof membrane on backer board 
on top side of shower seat is sloped min. 
1/4" per foot to drain, and extend 
bonded waterproof membrane beyond 
seat/wall intersection, and below top 
edge of shower pan membrane. 


2. Shower pan membrane is sloped 
min. 1/4" per foot to drain and 
folded up walls. 


3. Space, tape, seal, etc., backer board 
per manufacturer's requirements, 
including for bottom edge of board. 


4. Because of varying requirements, 
vapor retarder behind backer board 
now shown. Include and install 
vapor retarder when and as required 
by building code and backer board 
manufacturer. 


Typical Shower Seat for 
Backer Board Showers 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 481 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


STEAM SHOWER/ROOM; WOOD/METAL STUDS 


SR614-22 


* Wood or Metal Studs 

* Mortar Bed or Cement Backer Board Walls 
* Mortar Bed Floor 

* Ceramic Tile 


Slope ceiling 
2" per foot 


Cement backer board 
or mortar bed 


Sealed slip joint 
Ceramic tile 
Bond coat 
Bonded waterproof 
membrane* 
Cement backer board 
or mortar bed 
Shim, as required 
7 Optional vapor 

Ы геїагаег membrane* 
| Wood or metal 
studs/insulation 
(typically rigid foam) 
Sealed slip joint 
Reinforced 
mortar bed 


Shower pan membrane 
Ц . ==, 


Ын Ss. ZEE 
Sloped fill 


under shower pan 


Shower receptors, curbs, seats, etc., 
must be properly detailed and installed 
to avoid water damage to adjacent 
building materials. See common shower 
configurations section. 


* For continuous use steam showers: 

If bonded waterproof membrane has a 
water vapor permeance greater than 

0.5 perms, a secondary vapor retarder 
membrane is required. See requirements. 
When used, vapor retarder membrane 
must overlap into shower pan membrane. 


Configuration of base 
with integrated bonding flange 


A~ 


m Continuous Bonded waterproof 


membrane connected to 
integrated bonding flange 


Integrated bonding flange 


Recommended Uses 


* For steam showers and steam rooms framed with wood or 
metal studs. Specify mortar bed walls option when wall flat- 
ness is critical, such as when tiles with any edge longer than 
15" are specified. 

Environmental Exposure Classifications 


* Res4. 


482 


* For installations that may be exposed to staining, specify 
tile and grout suitable for exposure. Consult product man- 
ufacturers; see also Notes and “Product Selection Guides.” 

Limitations 

* Duration of use as a steam shower or steam room as deter- 
mined by membrane and cement backer board (when used) 
manufacturers; lower membrane water vapor permeance 
decreases water vapor transmission. 

* Maximum stud spacing 16" on center. 
Requirements 
* Steam rooms are highly specialized applications. Design 
and installation are critical to avoid damage to adjoining 
materials from vapor migration. Design criteria must 
include consideration of necessary insulation and tempera- 
ture and humidity differential. 
Use a tile contractor knowledgeable in steam applications 
and experienced with the materials specified. 
Bonded waterproof membrane (sheet, liquid, and trowel- 
on) must be continuous and must adequately limit vapor 
transmission into adjacent spaces and building materials, 
according to intended duration of use as a steam shower. 
Steam showers designed for continuous use applications 
should specify a low perm waterproof membrane (a water- 
proof membrane meeting ANSI A118.10 and with a water 
vapor permeance rating of 0.5 perms or less when tested per 
ASTM E96 Procedure E, tested at 9096 relative humidity). 
When a waterproof membrane with a water vapor perme- 
ance rating greater than 0.5 perms is specified, a vapor 
retarder behind the wall assembly 1s required, and vapor 
retarder must have a water vapor permeance rating of 0.1 
perm or less when tested per ASTM E96 Procedure A, 
tested at 50% relative humidity. Consult waterproof mem- 
brane manufacturer for water vapor permeance rating and 
vapor retarder requirements. 
Specifier shall indicate how waterproofing and vapor 
retarding is to be achieved, including details for membrane 
penetrations such as penetrations for plumbing, lighting fix- 
tures, fasteners, etc. Specifier shall also indicate where and 
how to waterproof curbs and jambs and where membrane 
terminates. Area outside steam shower door is a wet area 
and should be treated accordingly. 

Check with membrane manufacturer for suitability for 

applicable conditions, as not all membranes are suitable for 

steam, high temperature and/or chemical exposure. 


Some waterproof membrane manufacturers require use of a 
vapor retarder membrane in addition to the waterproof 
membrane. Consult membrane manufacturer for require- 
ments. When used, vapor retarder membrane must weather 
lap itself and lap into the shower pan membrane. 

If vapor retarder membrane is required, integrated bonding 
flange cannot be used. 

Follow waterproof membrane manufacturers' directions for 
interface between drain and membrane(s). 

Design professional to specify adequate insulation on walls 
and ceilings to reduce condensation. Consult insulation 
manufacturer for application suitability. 

Seal all membrane penetrations with appropriate sealant 
according to membrane manufacturer's requirements. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


STEAM SHOWER/ROOM; WOOD/METAL STUDS 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


* Specify slip joints at change in plane, such as where walls 
and ceiling meet. 
* Slope ceiling minimum 2" per foot to avoid condensate 
dripping onto occupants; sloping ceiling from center can 
minimize rundown on walls. 
When mortar bed walls, studs must provide firm anchorage 
for metal lath. 
When mortar bed walls, mortar bed wall thickness—" 
minimum to 1/4" maximum. 
When mortar bed walls, cut lath at all slip joints. 
Slope shower pan membrane minimum 1⁄4" per foot to weep 
holes in drain. 
Turn shower pan membrane up walls a minimum of 3" above 
shower curb (6" above floor in showers without curbs). 
Surround drain with pea gravel or other weep protection to 
prevent mortar from blocking weep holes. (Does not apply 
if integrated bonding flange is used.) 
Wood studs, when used—dry and well braced, minimum 
depth 3". 
Metals studs, when used—well-braced; 20 gauge (0.033") 
or heavier; minimum depth 34" for residential applications 
or 394" for commercial applications. 
Preparation by Backer Board Installers 
* Maximum allowable variation in the tile substrate—for tiles 
with all edges shorter than 15," maximum allowable varia- 
tion is 1⁄4" in 10' from the required plane, with no more than 
Yo" variation in 12" when measured from the high points in 
the surface. For tiles with at least one edge 15" in length, 
maximum allowable variation is 1⁄4" in 10' from the required 
plane, with по more than 146" variation in 24" when meas- 
ured from the high points in the surface. 
Horizontal joints—'%" spacing filled solid and taped with 
latex-portland cement mortar and 2" alkali-resistant glass 
fiber mesh tape. 
Vertical joints—fill any space and tape with latex-portland 
cement mortar and 2" alkali-resistant glass fiber mesh tape. 
Corners—leave space between backer units. Tape joints using 
skim coat of latex-portland cement mortar, but do not fill. 
Center backer board end or edge joints on framing and stag- 
ger joints in adjacent rows so four corners do not come 
together within the same plane. Space panel ends and edges 
in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations. 
Materials 
* Multiple options exist for membranes, mortars, grouts, 
and other materials and must be clearly specified to be 
included. If not specifically indicated, optional materials 
are not included and mortar/grout choice defaults to 
minimum performance specification indicated. Con- 
sider each system component and intended use to deter- 
mine minimum requirements and to specify options. 
Ceramic tile—ANSI A137.1 and recommended by manu- 
facturer for use in steam showers. 
e Cementitious grout—ANSI A118.6 or better or ISO CG1 
or better. 
* Epoxy grout, when used—ANSI A118.3 or ISO RG. 
* Cementitious bond coat: 
e ANSI A118.15 or better or ISO C2S1 or better, unless 
ANSI A118.1 or ISO СІ is recommended by membrane 
manufacturer. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


* Cement backer board, when used—ANSI A118.9 or ASTM 
C1325 (Type A). 

* Fasteners—noncorrosive and nonoxidizing. 

* Hot dipped fasteners meeting ASTM F2329 required in wet 
areas. 

• 2" alkali-resistant glass fiber mesh tape. 

* Waterproof membrane—ANSI A118.10 and recommended 
by membrane manufacturer for use in specific application. 
For continuous use applications, see Requirements for water 
vapor permeance. 

* Vapor retarder membrane, when used—recommended by 
manufacturer for use in specific application. 

* Metal studs, when used—ASTM C645. 

* Shower pan membrane—ANSI A118.10, ASTM D4068, or 
D4551 and meeting applicable building code. 

* Mortar bed and reinforcing—ANSI A108.1A. 

* Flexible mildew-resistant sealant—ASTM C920 and rec- 
ommended by manufacturer for use in steam showers. 

Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 

* See "Green Building Standards and Green Product Selection 
Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for product 
sustainability and contribution to green building design. 


* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 

Preparation by Other Trades 

* Wall framing shall meet the general framing requirements 
of ANSI A108.11-4.0-4.3. 

Movement Joint (architect must show type of joint 

and show location and details on drawings) 

* Movement joints—mandatory according to EJ171. 

* Slip joints at changes in plane, such as where walls and ceil- 
ing meet. 

Installation Specifications 

* Shower pan membrane—ANSI A108.01-3.6. 

* Mortar bed and reinforcing—ANSI A108.1A, .1B, and .1C. 

* Tile—ANSI A108.5. 

e Cementitious grout—A108.10. 

* Epoxy grout—A108.6. 

e Waterproof membrane and slip joint —ANSI A108.13 and 
membrane manufacturer's slip joint directions. 

* Movement Joints—EJ171 and ASTM C1193. 

Notes 

* Use of softened water in steam showers and steam rooms 
helps reduce grout and tile staining due to iron and/or hard 
water. Such stains may require harsh chemicals for removal. 
Select products suitable for water type and maintenance 
practices that will be used. 

* Standard grouts will need to be periodically maintained 
over the life of the steam shower. 

* Steam unit design must take into consideration the affect of 
moisture vapor transmission (MVT) on opposite side of 
steam unit walls. MVT can cause efflorescence and can 
affect paints and other adhered finishes. 


483 


TCNA HANDBOOK SHOWER RECEPTOR RENOVATION 


TR418-22 


* Mortar Bed Walls 
¢ Mortar Bed Floor 


Existing ceramic tile, 
mortar bed & membrane 


New continuous 
sealant bead 


New membrane/flashing 


New ceramic tile, bond 
coat & mortar bed 


New reinforced 
mortar bed 


New flexible sealant 
New shower pan 


New sloped 
fill under 


shower pan Weep holes 


Pea gravel or 
other weep 
protection 


Recommended Uses 

* For use where old shower pan has failed. 

Requirements 

* Remove existing shower receptor, shower pan, and wall tile, 
as required, to install new shower pan. 

* Replace any damaged wall and floor substrate materials. 

* New shower pan—slope 4" per foot to weep holes in drain. 

* New shower pan to turn up wall a minimum of 3" above 
curb (6" above floor in showers without curbs). 


* New wall membrane/flashing (ANSI A108.02-3.8) placed 
behind existing wall membrane, out over new shower pan, 
and fastened to studs. 

* Place continuous bead of sealant on existing wall mortar 
with new wall mortar brought up tight against it. 

Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 

* See “Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 
design. 


* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 
tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 


Notes 
* See B414 for complete specifications. 


484 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


SHOWER RECEPTOR RENOVATION 


TCNA HANDBOOK 


TR420-22 


* Backer Board Walls 
* Mortar Bed Floor 
Existing ceramic tile, 


bond coat, backer 
board, and membrane 


New continuous 
sealant bead 


New membrane/flashing 
New skimcoat 

New 1/4" cbu or mortar 
New flexible sealant 


New reinforced 
mortar bed 1" to 13/4.” 


New shower pan 
New ceramic tile 
and bond coat 


New bonded 
waterproof membrane 


shower pan 


Pea gravel or 
other weep 
protection 


Recommended Uses 

* For use where old shower pan has failed. 

Requirements 

* Remove existing shower receptor, shower pan, and wall tile, 
as required, to install new shower pan. 

* Replace any damaged wall and floor substrate materials. 

* New shower pan— slope 1⁄4" per foot to weep holes in drain. 


* New shower pan to turn up wall a minimum of 3" above 
curb (6" above floor in showers without curbs). 

* New wall membrane/flashing (ANSI A108.02-3.8) placed 
behind existing wall membrane, out over new shower pan, 
and fastened to studs. 

* Place continuous bead of sealant on existing wall substrate 
material with new wall substrate material brought up tight 
against it. 

Materials for Green/Sustainable Design 

* See “Green Building Standards and Green Product Selec- 
tion Guide" and consult manufacturers and suppliers for 
product sustainability and contribution to green building 
design. 

* Consider specifying tile and installation materials that meet 
ANSI A138.1, the American National Standard Specifica- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tions for Sustainable Ceramic Tiles, Glass Tiles, and Tile 
Installation Materials. 


Notes 


* See B415, B420, B426, or B431 for complete specifications 
based on wall backing type. 


485 


486 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX J - COMBINATION OF INDOOR AND OUTDOOR COMBUSTION AND VENTILATION OPENING DESIGN 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 487 


488 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX J 


COMBINATION OF INDOOR AND OUTDOOR COMBUSTION AND 
I VENTILATION OPENING DESIGN 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


J 101.0 General. 


J 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides general 
guidelines for the sizing of combination indoor and outdoor 
combustion and ventilation air openings. 


J 101.2 Example of Combination Indoor and Outdoor 

| Combustion Air Opening Design. Determine the required 
combination of indoor and outdoor combustion air opening 
sizes for the following appliance installation example. 


Example Installation: A fan-assisted furnace and a draft- 
hood-equipped water heater with the following inputs are 
located in a 15 foot by 30 foot (4572 mm by 9144 mm) base- 
ment with an 8 foot (2438 mm) ceiling. No additional indoor 
spaces can be used to help meet the appliance combustion air 
needs. 


Fan-Assisted Furnace Input: 100 000 British thermal units 
per hour (Btu/h) (29 kW) 


Draft Hood-Equipped Water Heater Input: 40 000 Btu/h (11.7 
kW) 


Solution: 


(1) Determine the total available room volume. Appliance 
room volume: 


15 feet by 30 feet (4572 mm by 9144 mm) with an 8 foot 
(2438 mm) ceiling = 3600 cubic feet (101.94 m?) 


(2) Determine the total required volume. The standard 
method to determine combustion air is used to calculate 
the required volume. The combined input for the appli- 
ances located in the basement is calculated as follows: 


100 000 Btu/h (29 kW) + 40 000 Btu/h (11.7 kW) = 
140 000 Btu/h (41 kW) 


The standard method requires that the required volume 
be determined based on 50 cubic feet per 1000 Btu/h 
(4.83 m3/kW). Using Table J 101.2, the required volume 

I for a 140 000 Btu/h (41 kW) combined input is 7000 
cubic feet (198.22 m°). 


Conclusion: The indoor volume is insufficient to supply com- 
bustion air since the total of 3600 cubic feet (101.94 m?) does 
not meet the required volume of 7000 cubic feet (198.22 m?). 
Therefore, additional combustion air shall be provided from 
the outdoors. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(3) Determine ratio of the available volume to the required 
volume: 
3600 cubic feet 


71000 cubic feet ж. 


(4) Determine the reduction factor to be used to reduce the 
full outdoor air opening size to the minimum required 
based on the ratio of indoor spaces: 


1.00 — 0.51 (from Step 3) = 0.49 


(5) Determine the single outdoor combustion air opening 
size as though all combustion air is to come from out- 
doors. In this example, the combustion air opening 
directly communicates with the outdoors: 


140 000 Btu/h 


— 47 square inches (0.03 m?) 
3000 British thermal units 
per square inch (Btu/im) 


(6) Determine the minimum outdoor combustion air open- 
ing area: 
Outdoor opening area — 0.49 (from Step 4) x 47 square 
inches (0.03 m?) = 23 square inches (0.01 m?) 


Section 506.5.3(3) requires the minimum dimension of 
the air opening should not be less than 3 inches (76 mm). 
[NFPA 54:1.1] 


489 


APPENDIX J 


490 


TABLE J 101.2 


STANDARD METHOD: REQUIRED VOLUME, ALL APPLIANCES* 
[NFPA 54: TABLE A.9.3.2.1] 


APPLIANCE INPUT 


REQUIRED VOLUME 


(Btu/h) (cubic feet) 
5000 250 
10 000 500 
15 000 750 
20 000 1000 
25 000 1250 
30 000 1500 
35 000 1750 
40 000 2000 
45 000 2250 
50 000 2500 
55 000 2750 
60 000 3000 
65 000 3250 
70 000 3500 
75 000 3750 
80 000 4000 
85 000 4250 
90 000 4500 
95 000 4750 
100 000 5000 
105 000 5250 
110 000 5500 
115 000 5750 
120 000 6000 
125 000 6250 
130 000 6500 
135 000 6750 
140 000 7000 
145 000 7250 
150 000 7500 
160 000 8000 
170 000 8500 
180 000 9000 
190 000 9500 
200 000 10 000 
210 000 10 500 
220 000 11 000 
230 000 11 500 
240 000 12 000 
250 000 12 500 
260 000 13 000 
270 000 13 500 
280 000 14 000 
290 000 14 500 
300 000 15 000 


For SI units: 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 cubic foot = 0.0283 m? 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX K - POTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 491 


492 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX K 
POTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


K 101.0 General. 


K 101.1 Applicability. The provisions of this appendix shall 
apply to the installation, construction, alteration, and repair 
of potable rainwater catchment systems. 


K 101.2 System Design. Potable rainwater catchment sys- 
tems in accordance with this appendix shall be designed by a 
registered design professional or person deemed competent 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction to perform potable rain- 
water catchment system design work. Where required, rain- 
water catchment systems shall be seismically restrained 
against earthquakes in accordance with the building code. 


K 101.3 Permit. It shall be unlawful for a person to con- 
struct, install, or alter, or cause to be constructed, installed, 
or altered a potable rainwater catchment systems in a build- 
ing or on a premise without first obtaining a permit to do such 
work from the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


K 101.3.1 Plumbing Plan Submission. No permit 
for a rainwater catchment system requiring a permit shall 
be issued until complete plumbing plans, with data sat- 
Isfactory to the Authority Having Jurisdiction, have been 
submitted and approved. No changes or connections shall 
be made to either the rainfall catchment or the potable 
water system within a site containing a rainwater catch- 
ment water system without approval by the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


K 101.3.2 System Changes. No changes or connec- 
tions shall be made to either the rainwater catchment sys- 
tem or the potable water system within a site containing 
a rainwater catchment system requiring a permit without 
approval by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


K 101.4 Product and Material Approval. System com- 
ponents shall be properly identified as to the manufacturer. 


K 101.4.1 Plumbing Materials and Systems. Pipe, 
pipe fittings, traps, fixtures, material, and devices used in 
a potable rainwater system shall be listed or labeled (third- 
party certified) by a listing agency (accredited conform- 
ity assessment body) and shall be in accordance with 
approved applicable recognized standards referenced 
within this code, and shall be free from defects. Unless 
otherwise provided for in this appendix, materials, fix- 
tures, or devices used or entering into the construction of 
plumbing systems, or parts thereof shall be submitted to 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction for approval. 
K 101.5 Maintenance and Inspection. Potable rainwater 
catchment systems and components shall be inspected and 
maintained in accordance with Section К 101.5.1 through 
Section K 101.5.3. 
K 101.5.1 Frequency. Potable rainwater catchment 
systems and components shall be inspected and main- 
tained in accordance with Table K 101.5.1 unless more 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


frequent inspection and maintenance are required by the 
manufacturer. 

K 101.5.2 Maintenance Log. A maintenance log for 
potable rainwater catchment systems shall be maintained 
by the property owner and be available for inspection. The 
property owner or designated appointee shall ensure that 
a record of testing, inspection, and maintenance in accor- 
dance with Table K 101.5.1 is maintained in the log. The 
log will indicate the frequency of inspection, and mainte- 
nance of each system. A record of the required water qual- 
ity tests shall be retained for not less than 2 years. 


K 101.5.3 Maintenance Responsibility. The required 
maintenance and inspection of potable rainwater catch- 
ment systems shall be the responsibility of the property 
owner unless otherwise required by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

K 101.6 Operation and Maintenance Manual. An oper- 

ation and maintenance manual for potable rainwater catch- 

ment systems shall be supplied to the building owner by the 

system designer. The operating and maintenance manual shall 

include the following: 

(1) Detailed diagram of the entire system and the location of 
system components. 


(2) Instructions for operating and maintaining the system. 

(3) Details on maintaining the required water quality as 
determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

(4) Details on deactivating the system for maintenance, 
repair, or other purposes. 

(5) Applicable testing, inspection, and maintenance fre- 
quencies in accordance with Table K 101.5.1. 


(6) A method of contacting the manufacturer(s). 


K 101.7 Minimum Water Quality Requirements. The min- 
imum water quality for potable rainwater catchment systems 
shall comply with the applicable water quality requirements as 
determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. In the absence 
of water quality requirements, the guidelines EPA/600/R- 
12/618 contains recommended water reuse guidelines to assist 
regulatory agencies develop, revise, or expand alternate water 
source water quality standards. 

K 101.8 Material Compatibility. In addition to the require- 
ments of this appendix, potable rainwater catchment systems 
shall be constructed of materials that are compatible with the 
type of pipe and fitting materials and water conditions in the 
system. 

K 101.9 System Controls. Controls for pumps, valves, and 
other devices that contain mercury that come in contact with 
the water supply shall not be permitted. 


493 


APPENDIX K 


TABLE K 101.5.1 


MINIMUM POTABLE RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEM TESTING, INSPECTION, AND MAINTENANCE FREQUENCY 


DESCRIPTION 


MINIMUM FREQUENCY 


Inspect and clean filters and screens, and replace (where necessary). 


Every 3 months 


Inspect and verify that disinfection, filters and water quality treatment devices and 
systems are operational. Perform water quality tests in accordance with the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. 


In accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, 
and the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Perform applicable water quality tests to verify compliance with Section K 104.3. 


Every 3 months 


Perform a water quality test for E. Coli, Total Coliform, and Heterotrophic bacte- 
ria. For a system where 25 different people consume water from the system over a 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter, 


60 day period, a water quality test for cryptosporidium shall be performed. 


or as directed by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


water collection surface. 


Inspect and clear debris from rainwater gutters, downspouts, and roof washers. Every 6 months 
Inspect and clear debris from the roof or other aboveground rainwater collection 
Every 6 months 
surface. 
Remove tree branches and vegetation overhanging roof or other aboveground rain- 
> EAS 8 As needed 


Inspect pumps and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect valves and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect pressure tanks and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter 


Clear debris and inspect storage tanks, locking devices, and verify operation. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter 


Inspect caution labels and marking. 


After initial installation and every 12 months thereafter 


K 102.0 Connection. 


K 102.1 General. No water piping supplied by a potable rain- 
water catchment system shall be connected to a source of sup- 
ply without the approval of the Authority Having Jurisdiction, 
Health Department, or other department having jurisdiction. 


K 102.2 Connections to Public or Private Potable 
Water Systems. Potable rainwater catchment systems shall 
have no direct connection to a public or private potable water 
supply or alternate water source system. Potable water from 
a public or private potable water system is permitted to be 
used as makeup water to the rainwater storage tank provided 
the public, or private potable water supply connection is pro- 
tected by an air gap or reduced-pressure principle backflow 
preventer in accordance with this code. 

K 102.3 Backflow Prevention. The potable rainwater 


catchment system shall be protected against backflow in 
accordance with this code. 


K 103.0 Potable Rainfall Catchment System Materials. 


K 103.1 Collections Surfaces. The collection surface for 
potable applications shall be constructed of a hard, impervious 
material and shall be approved for potable water use. Roof coat- 
ings, paints, and liners shall comply with NSF Protocol P151. 


K 103.1.1 Prohibited. Roof paints and coatings with 
lead, chromium, or zinc shall not be permitted. Wood 
roofing material and lead flashing shall not be permitted. 


K 103.2 Rainwater Catchment System Drainage 
Materials. Materials used in rainwater catchment drainage 
systems, including gutters, downspouts, conductors, and lead- 
ers shall be in accordance with the requirements of this code 
for storm drainage. 


494 


K 103.3 Storage Tanks. Rainwater storage shall comply 
with Section K 105.0. 


K 103.4 Water Supply and Distribution Materials. 
Potable rainwater supply and distribution materials shall com- 
ply with the requirements of this code for potable water sup- 
ply and distribution systems. 


K 104.0 Design and Installation. 


K 104.1 Collection Surfaces. Rainwater shall be collected 
from a roof or other cleanable aboveground surfaces specifi- 
cally designed for rainwater catchment. A rainwater catch- 
ment system shall not collect rainwater from: 


(1) Vehicular parking surfaces 
(2) Surface water runoff 
(3) Bodies of standing water 


K 104.2 Prohibited Discharges. Overflows, condensate, 
and bleed-off pipes from roof-mounted equipment and appli- 
ances shall not discharge onto roof surfaces that are intended 
to collect rainwater. 


K 104.3 Minimum Water Quality. Upon initial system 
startup, the quality of the water for the intended application 
shall be verified at the point(s) of use as determined by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction in accordance with Section K 
104.3.1 and Section K 104.3.2. Water quality maintenance 
shall be in accordance with Section K 104.3.3. 

K 104.3.1 Private Potable Water System. In the 

absence of water quality requirements determined by the 

Authority Having Jurisdiction, the minimum water qual- 


ity for a private potable water system at the point of use 
shall comply with Table K 104.3.1. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE K 104.3.1 
MINIMUM WATER QUALITY 


Escherichia coli (fecal coliform) Non-detectable 


Protozoan Cysts Non-detectable 


Viruses Non-detectable 


Turbidity «0.3 NTU 


K 104.3.2 Public Use Occupancies. The minimum 
water quality for a potable water system for public use 
occupancies at the point of use and testing procedures 
shall comply with the Environmental Protection Agency 
(EPA) Safe Drinking Water Act for a public water sys- 
tem. 


K 104.3.3 Maintenance. Normal system maintenance 
shall require system testing for Escherichia coli (fecal 
coliform) and turbidity every 3 months in accordance 
with Table K 104.3.3. Upon failure of the fecal coliform 
test, the system shall be re-commissioned involving 
cleaning, and retesting in accordance with Section K 
104.3. Testing for viruses and cysts shall occur once after 
3 months of initial operation and once every 12 months 
thereafter. 

Exception: Upon failure of the virus or cyst test, the tests 
will be repeated every 3 months until the tests results are 
negative for two consecutive tests. 


TABLE K 104.3.3 
MINIMUM SYSTEM MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS 


Escherichia coli (fecal coliform) Non-detectable 


Turbidity «0.3 NTU 


K 104.4 Water Quality Devices and Equipment. 
Devices and equipment used to treat rainwater to maintain 
the minimum water quality requirements determined by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be listed or labeled (third- 
party certified) by a listing agency (accredited conformity 
assessment body) and approved for the intended application. 


K 104.4.1 Filtration Devices. Potable water filters shall 
comply with NSF/ANSI 53 and shall be installed in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. 


K 104.4.2 Disinfection Devices. Chlorination, 
ozone, ultraviolet, or other disinfection methods 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, or the 
product is listed and certified according to a microbio- 
logical reduction performance standard for drinking 
water, shall be used to treat harvested rainwater to meet 
the required water quality permitted. The disinfection 
devices and systems shall be installed in accordance with 
the manufacturer's installation instructions and the con- 
ditions of listing. Disinfection devices and systems shall 
be located downstream of the storage tank. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX K 


K 104.4.3 Filtration and Disinfection Systems. 
Filtration and disinfection systems shall be located after 
the water storage tank. Where a chlorination system is 
installed, it shall be installed upstream of filtration sys- 
tems. Where an ultraviolet disinfection system is 
installed, a filter not more than 5 microns (5 um) shall be 
installed upstream of the disinfection system. 


K 104.5 Overhanging Tree Branches and Vegetation. 
Tree branches and vegetation shall not be located over the 
roof or other aboveground rainwater collection surface. 
Where existing tree branch and vegetation growth extends 
over the rainwater collection surface, it shall be removed in 
accordance with Section K 101.5. 


K 105.0 Rainwater Storage Tanks. 


K 105.1 General. Rainwater storage tanks shall be installed 
in accordance with Section K 105.2 through Section K 105.10. 


K 105.2 Construction. Rainwater storage tanks shall be 
constructed of solid, durable materials not subject to exces- 
sive corrosion or decay and shall be watertight. Storage tanks 
shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction for 
potable water applications, provided such tanks are in accor- 
dance with approved applicable standards. 


K 105.3 Location. Rainwater storage tanks shall be per- 
mitted to be installed above or below grade. 


K 105.3.1 Above Grade. Above grade, storage tanks 
shall be of an opaque material, approved for aboveground 
use in direct sunlight, or shall be shielded from direct sun- 
light. Tanks shall be installed in an accessible location to 
allow for inspection and cleaning. The tank shall be 
installed on a foundation or platform that is constructed to 
accommodate the weight and loads when filled to maxi- 
mum capacity in accordance with the building code. 


K 105.3.2 Below Grade. Rainwater storage tanks 
installed below grade shall be structurally designed to 
withstand anticipated earth or other loads. Holding tank 
covers shall be capable of supporting an earth load of not 
less than 300 pounds per square foot (16/0) (1465 kg/m?) 
where the tank 1s designed for underground installation. 
Below grade rainwater tanks installed underground shall 
be provided with manholes. The manhole opening shall 
be not less than 20 inches (508 mm) in diameter and 
located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the sur- 
rounding grade. The surrounding grade shall be sloped 
away from the manhole. Underground tanks shall be bal- 
lasted, anchored, or otherwise secured, to prevent the 
tank from floating out of the ground where empty. The 
combined weight ofthe tank and hold down system shall 
meet or exceed the buoyancy force of the tank. 


K 105.4 Drainage and Overflow. Rainwater storage tanks 
shall be provided with a means of draining and cleaning. The 
overflow drain shall not be equipped with a shutoff valve. 
The overflow outlet shall discharge in accordance with this 
code for storm drainage systems. Where discharging to the 
storm drainage system, the overflow drain shall be protected 
from backflow of the storm drainage system by a backwater 
valve or other approved method. 


495 


APPENDIX K 


K 105.4.1 Overflow Outlet Size. The overflow outlet 
shall be sized to accommodate the flow of the rainwater 
entering the tank and not less than the aggregate cross- 
sectional area of the inflow pipes. 


K 105.5 Animals and Insects. Rainwater tank openings to 
the atmosphere shall be protected to prevent the entrance of 
insects, birds, or rodents into the tank. 


K 105.6 Human Access. Rainwater tank access openings 
exceeding 12 inches (305 mm) in diameter shall be secured to 
prevent tampering and unintended entry by either a lockable 
device or other approved method. 


K 105.7 Exposure to Sunlight. Rainwater tank openings 
shall not be exposed to direct sunlight. 


K 105.8 Inlets. A device or arrangement of fittings shall be 
installed at the inlet of the tank to prevent rainwater from dis- 
turbing sediment as it enters the tank. 


K 105.9 Primary Tank Outlets. The primary tank outlet 
shall be located not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the 
bottom of the tank, or shall be provided with a floating inlet 
to draw water from the cistern just below the water surface. 


K 105.10 Storage Tank Venting. Where venting using 
drainage or overflow piping is not provided or is considered 
insufficient, a vent shall be installed on each tank. The vent 
shall extend from the top of the tank and terminate not less 
than 6 inches (152 mm) above grade and shall be not less than 
1% inches (40 mm) in diameter. The vent terminal shall be 
directed downward and covered with a %2 of an inch (2.4 
mm) mesh screen to prevent the entry of vermin and insect. 


K 105.11 Pumps. Pumps serving rainwater catchment sys- 
tems shall be listed for potable water use. Pumps supplying 
water to water closets, urinals, and trap primers shall be capa- 
ble of delivering not less than the minimum residual pressure 
required by the highest and most remote outlet served. Where 
the water pressure in the rainwater supply system within the 
building exceeds 80 psi (552 kPa), a pressure reducing valve 
reducing the pressure to 80 psi (552 kPa) or less to water out- 
lets in the building shall be installed in accordance with this 
code. 


K 105.12 Roof Drains. Primary and secondary roof drains, 
conductors, leaders, overflows, and gutters shall be designed 
and installed in accordance with this code. 


K 106.0 Freeze Protection. 


K 106.1 General. Tanks and piping installed in locations 
subject to freezing shall be provided with an approved means 
of freeze protection. 


K 106.2 Roof Washer or Pre-Filtration System. Col- 
lected rainwater shall pass through a roof washer or pre-fil- 
tration system before the water enters the rainwater storage 
tank. Roof washer systems shall comply with Section K 
106.2.1 through Section K 106.2.4. 


K 106.2.1 Size. The roof washer shall be sized to 
direct rainwater containing debris that has accumulated 
on the collection surface away from the storage tank. 
ARCSA/ASPE/ANSI 63 contains additional guidance 
on acceptable methods of sizing roof washers. 


496 


K 106.2.2 Debris Screen. The inlet to the roof washer 
shall be provided with a debris screen or other approved 
means that protects the roof washer from the intrusion of 
debris and vermin. Where the debris screen is installed, the 
debris screen shall be corrosion resistant and shall have 
openings not larger than % of an inch (12.7 mm). 


K 106.2.3 Drain Discharge. Water drained from the 
roof washer, or pre-filter shall be diverted away from the 
storage tank and discharged to a disposal area that does 
not cause property damage or erosion. Roof washer 
drainage shall not drain over a public way. 
K 106.2.4 Automatic Drain. Roof washing systems 
shall be provided with an automatic means of self-drain- 
ing between rain events. 
K 106.3 Roof Gutters. Gutters shall maintain a minimum 
slope and be sized in accordance with this code. 
K 106.4 Drains, Conductors, and Leaders. The design 
and size of rainwater drains, conductors, and leaders shall 
comply with this code. 
K 106.5 Size of Potable Water Piping. Potable rainwa- 
ter system distribution piping shall be sized in accordance 
with this code for sizing potable water piping. 


K 1070 Cleaning. 


K 1071 General. The interior surfaces of tanks and equip- 
ment shall be clean before they are put into service. 


K 108.0 Supply System Inspection and Test. 


K 108.1 General. Rainwater catchment systems shall be 
inspected and tested in accordance with the applicable provi- 
sions ofthis code for testing of potable water and storm drainage 
systems. Storage tanks shall be filled with water to the overflow 
opening for 24 hours, and during the inspection, or by other 
means as approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Seams 
and joints shall be exposed during the inspection and checked 
for water tightness. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 


APPENDIX L - SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES 


(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


. BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
2 |1-AC | AC SS | SS/CC 172 1314 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal 5 adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


497 


498 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 
SUSTAINABLE PRACTICES 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


L 101.0 General. 


L 101.1 Applicability. The purpose of this appendix is to 
provide a comprehensive set of technically sound provisions 
that encourage sustainable practices and works towards 
enhancing the design and construction of plumbing systems 
that result in a positive long-term environmental impact. This 
appendix is not intended to circumvent the health, safety, and 
general welfare requirements of this code. 


L 201.0 Definitions. 


L 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 


Catch Can Test. Method to measure the precipitation rate 
of an irrigation system by placing catchment containers at 
various random positions in the irrigation zone for a pre- 
scribed amount of time during irrigation application. The vol- 
umes of water in the containers are measured, averaged, and 
calculated to determine precipitation rate. Tests are conducted 
using irrigation industry accepted practices. 


Combination Ovens. A device that combines the function 
of hot air convection (oven mode) and saturated and super- 
heated steam heating (steam mode), or both, to perform 
steaming, baking, roasting, rethermalizing, and proofing of 
various food products. In general, the term combination oven 
is used to describe this type of equipment, which is self-con- 
tained. The combination oven is also referred to as a combi- 
nation oven/steamer, combi or combo. 


Dedicated Meter. A water measuring device used at a sub- 
section or end use of a water supply system for any ofthe fol- 
lowing purposes: billing, water management, collecting and 
analyzing water usage data, detection of leaks, equipment 
failure, water waste, and irregular or abnormal use for a spe- 
cific application. Also called a submeter. 


Dry Weather Runoff. Water that flows along a surface, in 
a channel or sub-surface including groundwater seepage, and 
is not associated with a rain event. 


Energy Star. A joint program of the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy. 
Energy Star is a voluntary program designed to identify and 
promote energy-efficient products and practices. 


C IC. Evapotranspiration rate of the plants derived by multiply- 
ing ET, by the appropriate plant factor or coefficient. 

ET. Reference evapotranspiration for a cool-season grass as 
calculated by the standardized Penman-Monteith equation 
based on weather-station data. 

Evapotranspiration (ET). The water transpired from vege- 
tation, evaporated from the soil, water, and plant surfaces. 
Evapotranspiration rates are values expressed in inches (mm) 
per unit of time (day, week, month, or year). Evapotranspira- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tion rates vary by components of weather conditions, including 
insolation, humidity, temperatures and wind, and time of year. 


Flow-Through Design. A fitting or a fitting configuration 
with two primary inlet connections and one, or more outlet con- 
nections with the purpose to supply water to a fixture fitting. 


Food Steamers (Steam Cookers). A cooking appliance 
wherein heat is imparted to food in a closed compartment by 
direct contact with steam. The compartment can be at or above 
atmospheric pressure. The steam can be static or circulated. 


Gang Showers. Shower compartments designed and 
intended for use by multiple persons simultaneously. 


Hydrozone. A grouping of plants with similar water require- 
ments that are irrigated by the same irrigation zone. 


Irrigation Control System. An irrigation control system 
consists of a combination of a programmable controller using 
one or more inputs or sensors that, in combination, estimate 
or measure the availability of moisture for plants in order to 
operate an irrigation system, in such a manner that the system 
replenishes water as needed while minimizing excess water 
use. A properly programmed irrigation control system 
requires initial site specific set-up and will make irrigation 
schedule adjustments, including run times and required cycles 
throughout the irrigation season without human intervention. 


Irrigation Demand. The amount of water not supplied by 
natural precipitation that is needed to maintain landscape plant 
life in good condition. Irrigation demand is calculated by sub- 
tracting natural effective precipitation from the ET rate 
adjusted by the landscape coefficient, which includes the func- 
tional purpose and desired quality of the plant being irrigated. 


Irrigation Emission Device. The various landscape irri- 
gation equipment terminal fittings or outlets that emit water 
for irrigating vegetation in a landscape. 


Irrigation Zone. The landscape area that is irrigated by a 
set of landscape irrigation emission devices installed on the 
same water supply line downstream of a single valve. 


Kitchen and Bar Sink Faucets. A faucet that discharges 
into a kitchen or bar sinks in domestic or commercial instal- 
lations. Supply fittings that discharge into other type sinks, 
including clinical sinks, floor sinks, service sinks and laundry 
sinks are not included. 


Lavatory. (1) A basin or vessel for washing. (2) A plumbing 
fixture, as defined in (1), especially placed for use in personal 
hygiene. Principally not used for laundry purposes and never 
used for food preparation, or utensils, in food services. (3) A 
fixture designed for the washing of the hands and face. Some- 
times called a wash basin. 


Lavatory Faucet. A faucet that discharges into a lavatory 
basin in a domestic or commercial installation. 


499 


APPENDIX L 


Low Application Rate Irrigation. A means of irrigation 
using low precipitation rate sprinkler heads or low flow emit- 
ters in conjunction with cycling irrigation schedules to apply 
water at a rate less than the soil absorption rate. 


Low Flow Emitter. Low-flow irrigation emission device 
designed to dissipate water pressure and discharge a small 
| uniform flow or trickle of water at a constant flow rate. 


Low Precipitation Rate Sprinkler Heads. Landscape 
irrigation emission devices or sprinkler heads with a maxi- 
mum precipitation rate of 1 inch per hour (25.4 mm/h) over 
the applied irrigation area. 


Maintenance. The upkeep of property or equipment by the 
owner of the property in compliance with the requirements 
of this appendix. 


Metering Faucet. A self-closing faucet that dispenses a spe- 
cific volume of water for each actuation cycle. The volume or 
cycle duration can be fixed or adjustable. 


Modified Evapotranspiration. Numeric values, expressed 
in inches/hour (in/h), of evapotranspiration rates, derived by 
altering ETo rates by applying factors of specific needs of the 
vegetation and local climate conditions. Modified evapotran- 
spiration rates are used as a factor in estimating the irrigation 
water needs of landscapes. Common usage includes reference 
evapotranspiration as the base rate, modified by coefficients or 
factors for specific plant types and densities. 


Multi-Occupant Spaces. Indoor spaces used for presen- 
tations and training, including classrooms and conference 
rooms. 


On-Site Renewable Energy. Energy generated from renew- 
able sources produced at the building site. [ASHRAE 90.1:3.2] 


Pre-Rinse Spray Valve. A handheld device for use with 
commercial dishwashing and ware washing equipment that 
sprays water on dishes, flatware, and other food service items 
for the purpose of removing food residue before cleaning and 
sanitizing the items. 


Precipitation Rate. The sprinkler head application rate of 
water applied to landscape irrigation zone, measured as 
inches per hour (mm/h). Precipitation rates of sprinkler heads 
are calculated according to the flow rate, pattern, and spacing 
of the sprinkler heads. 


Recirculation System. A system of hot water supply and 
return piping with shutoff valves, balancing valves, circulat- 
ing pumps, and a method of controlling the circulating sys- 
tem. 


Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo). Numeric value, 
expressed in inches/hour (in/h), calculated as the water neces- 
sary to produce maximum biomass based upon a cool-season 
turf grass 4 inches to 6 inches (102 mm to 152 mm) tall. Com- 
mon sources for obtaining local reference evapotranspiration 
rates are local agriculture extension services, state departments 
of agriculture, water agencies, irrigation professionals, the 
United States Geological Survey, and internet websites. 


Renewable Energy Resources. Energy from solar, wind, 
biomass or hydro, or extracted from hot fluid or steam heated 
within the earth. [ASHRAE 90.1:3.2] 


500 


Reverse Osmosis Reject Water. Water that does not pass 
through a membrane of a reverse osmosis system. 


Run Out. The developed length of pipe that extends away 
from the circulating loop system to a fixture(s). 


Self Closing Faucet. A faucet that closes itself after the 
actuation or control mechanism is deactivated. The actuation 
or control mechanism can be mechanical or electronic. 


Single Occupant Spaces. Private offices, workstations 
in open offices, reception workstations, and ticket booths. 


Soil Absorption Rate. The rate of the soil's ability to allow 
water to percolate or infiltrate the soil and be retained in the 
root zone of the soil expressed as inches per hour (mm/h). 


Sprinkler Head. Landscape irrigation emission device dis- 
charging water in the form of sprays or rotating streams, not 
including low flow emitters. 


Storage Tank. The central component of the rainwater, 
stormwater, or dry weather runoff catchment system. Also 
known as a cistern or rain barrel. 


Stormwater. Natural precipitation that has contacted a surface 
at grade or below grade and has not been put to beneficial use. 


Stormwater Catchment System. A system that collects 
and stores stormwater for beneficial use. 


Submeter. A meter installed subordinate to a site meter. 
Also known as a dedicated meter. 


WaterSense. A voluntary program of the U.S., Environ- 
mental Protection Agency, designed to identify and promote 
water-efficient products and practices. 


Water Closet. A fixture with a water-containing receptor 
that receives liquid and solid body waste and on actuation 
conveys the waste through an exposed integral trap into a 
drainage system. Also referred to as a toilet. 


L 301.0 General Regulations. 


L 301.1 Installation. Plumbing systems covered by this 
appendix shall be installed in accordance with this code, other 
applicable codes, and the manufacturer's installation instruc- 
tions. 


L 301.2 Qualifications. Where permits are required, the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to 
require contractors, installers, or service technicians to 
demonstrate competency. Where determined by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction, the contractor, installer or service 
technician shall be licensed to perform such work. 


L 302.0 Disposal of Liquid Waste. 


L 302.1 Disposal. It shall be unlawful for a person to cause, 
suffer, or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement, or 
other liquid wastes, in a place or manner, except through and 
by means of an approved drainage system, installed and main- 
tained in accordance with the provisions of this code. 

L 302.2 Connections to Plumbing System Required. 
Equipment and appliances, used to receive or discharge liq- 
uid wastes or sewage, shall be connected properly to the 
drainage system of the building or premises, in accordance 
with the requirements of this code. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


L 303.0 Abandonment. 

L 303.1 General. An abandoned system or part thereof cov- 
ered under the scope of this appendix shall be disconnected 
from remaining systems, drained, plugged, and capped in an 
approved manner. 


L 401.0 Water Conservation and Efficiency. 

L 401.1 Scope. The provisions of this section establish the 
means of conserving potable and nonpotable water used in 
and around a building. 


L 402.0 Water-Conserving Plumbing Fixtures and 
Fittings. 

L 402.1 General. The maximum water consumption of fix- 
tures and fixture fittings shall comply with the flow rates 
specified in Table L 402.1, and Section L 402.2 through Sec- 
tion L 402.10. 


TABLE L 402.1 
MAXIMUM FIXTURE AND FIXTURE FITTINGS FLOW RATES 


FIXTURE TYPE FLOW RATE 
Showerheads 2.0 gpm at 80 psi! 


Kitchen faucets residential? 1.8 gpm at 60 psi 


| Lavatory faucets residential? 1.5 gpm at 60 psi 


Lavatory faucets other than 


residential 0.5 gpm at 60 psi 


Metering faucets 0.25 gallons/cycle 


One 0.25 gallons/cycle fixture fit- 
ting for each 20 inches rim space 


Metering faucets for wash 
fountains 


One 2.2 gpm at 60 psi fixture fit- 
ting for each 20 inches rim space 


1.28 gallons/flush? 
0.5 gallons/flush? 


Wash fountains 


Water Closets 


Urinals 


Commercial Pre-Rinse 


Spray Valves See Section L 402.9 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute — 0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch 
= 6.8947 kPa, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 
Notes: 
| ! Shall be listed to EPA WaterSense Specification for Showerheads. For 
multiple showerheads serving one shower compartment see Section L 
402.6.1. 
| ? Shall be listed to EPA WaterSense Specification for Tank-Type Toilet or 
Specification for Flushometer-Valve Water Closets. 
Shall be listed to EPA WaterSense Flushing Urinal Specification. Non- 
water urinals shall comply with specifications listed in Section L 402.3.1. 
^ See Section L 402.4. 
Shall be listed to EPA WaterSense High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet 
Specification. 


w 


— 
wn 


L 402.2 Water Closets. No water closet shall have an 
effective flush volume exceeding 1.28 gallons per flush (gpf) 
(4.8 Lpf). 
L 402.2.1 Gravity, Pressure Assisted, and Elec- 
tro-Hydraulic Tank Type Water Closets. Gravity, 
pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank-type water 
closets shall have a maximum effective flush volume of 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


not more than 1.28 gallons (4.8 Lpf) of water per flush in 
accordance with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 or 
ASME A112.19.14 and shall be listed to the EPA 
WaterSense Specification for Tank-Type Toilets. The 
effective flush volume for dual flush toilets is defined as 
the composite, average flush volume of two reduced 
flushes and one full flush. 


L 402.2.2 Flushometer-Valve Activated Water 
Closets. Flushometer-valve activated water closets 
shall have a maximum flush volume of not more than 
1.28 gallons (4.8 Lpf) of water per flush in accordance 
with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 and shall be listed to 
the EPA WaterSense Specification for Flushometer- 
Valve Water Closets. 


L 402.3 Urinals. Urinals shall have a maximum flush vol- 
ume of not more than 0.5 gallon (1.9 Lpf) of water per flush 
in accordance with ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 or CSA 
В45.5ЛАРМО 7124. Flushing urinals shall be listed to the 
EPA WaterSense Flushing Urinal Specification. 


L 402.3.1 Nonwater Urinals. Nonwater urinals shall 
comply with ASME A112.19.3/CSA B45.4, ASME 
A112.19.19, or CSA B45.5/IAPMO 7124. Nonwater uri- 
nals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with 
the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where 
nonwater urinals are installed, they shall have a water 
distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a 
height not less than 56 inches (1422 mm) to allow for the 
installation of an approved backflow prevention device 
in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines 
shall be installed with shutoff valves located as close as 
possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation 
of dead ends. Where nonwater urinals are installed, not 
less than one water supplied fixture rated at not less than 
1 drainage fixture unit (DFU) shall be installed upstream 
on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and 
rinsing. 

L 402.3.2 Nonwater Urinals with Drain Cleansing 
Action. Nonwater urinals with drain cleansing action 
shall comply with ASME A112.19.19 and shall be 
cleaned, maintained, and installed in accordance with the 
manufacturer’s installation instructions. 


L 402.4 Residential Kitchen Faucets. The maximum 
flow rate of residential kitchen faucets shall not exceed 1.8 
gallons per minute (gpm) (6.8 L/m) at 60 pounds-force per 
square inch (psi) (414 kPa). Kitchen faucets are permitted to 
temporarily increase the flow above the maximum rate, but 
not to exceed 2.2 gpm (8.3 L/m) at 60 psi (414 kPa), and shall 
revert to a maximum flow rate of 1.8 gpm (6.8 L/m) at 60 psi 
(414 kPa) upon valve closure. 


L 402.5 Lavatory Faucets. The maximum water flow rate 
of faucets shall comply with Section L 402.5.1 and Section L 
402.5.2. 
L 402.5.1 Lavatory Faucets in Residences, 
Apartments, and Private Bathrooms in Lodging 
Facilities, Hospitals, and Patient Care Facilities. 
The flow rate for lavatory faucets installed in residences, 
apartments, and private bathrooms in lodging, hospitals, 


501 


APPENDIX L 


and patient care facilities (including skilled nursing and 
long-term care facilities) shall not exceed 1.5 gpm (5.7 
L/m) at 60 psi (414 kPa) in accordance with ASME 
A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 and shall be listed to the EPA 
WaterSense High Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specifica- 
tion. 


L 402.5.2 Lavatory Faucets in Other Than Resi- 
dences, Apartments, and Private Bathrooms in 
Lodging Facilities. Lavatory faucets installed in bath- 
rooms of buildings or occupancies other than those spec- 
ified in Section L 402.5.1 shall be in accordance with 
Section L 402.5.2(1) or Section L 402.5.2(2). 


(1) The flow rate shall not exceed 0.5 gpm (1.9 L/m) at 
60 psi (414 kPa) in accordance with ASME 
A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 


(2) Metering faucets shall deliver not more than 0.25 
gallons (0.95 L) of water per cycle. 


L 402.6 Showerheads. Showerheads shall not exceed 2.0 
gpm (7.6 L/m) at 80 psi (552 kPa), and shall be listed to 
ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 and the EPA WaterSense 
Specification for Showerheads. 


L 402.6.1 Multiple Showerheads Serving One 
Shower Compartment. The total allowable flow rate 
of water from multiple showerheads flowing at a given 
time, with or without a diverter, including rain systems, 
waterfalls, bodysprays, and jets, shall not exceed 2.0 gpm 
(7.6 L/m) per shower compartment, where the floor area 
of the shower compartment is less than 1800 square 
inches (1.161 m?). For each increment of 1800 square 
inches (1.161 m?) of floor area after that or part thereof, 
additional showerheads are allowed, provided the total 
flow rate of water from flowing devices shall not exceed 
2.0 gpm (7.6 L/m) for each such increment. 
Exceptions: 

(1) Gang showers in nonresidential occupancies. Sin- 
gular showerheads or multiple shower outlets serv- 
ing one showering position in gang showers shall 
not have more than 2.0 gpm (7.6 L/m) total flow. 


(2 


МУ 


Where provided, shower compartments required for 
persons with disabilities in accordance with Chapter 
17 shall not have more than 4.0 gpm (15 L/m) total 
flow, where one outlet is the hand shower. 

L 402.6.2 Bath and Shower Diverters. Tub spout 
bath and shower diverters, while operating in the shower 
mode, shall not exceed 0.1 gpm (0.4 L/m) rate of leakage 
in accordance with ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1. 

L 402.6.3 Shower Valves. Shower valves shall com- 
ply with the temperature control performance require- 
ments of ASSE 1016/ASME A112.1016/CSA B125.16 
when tested for the rated flow rate of the installed show- 
erhead. 


L 402.6.3.1 Marking. Control valves for showers 
and tub/shower combinations shall be tagged, 
labeled, or marked in accordance with the applicable 
standards. 
L 402.7 Recirculating Shower Systems. Recirculating 
shower systems shall comply with IAPMO IGC 330. 


502 


L 402.8 Bath and Shower Flow-Reduction Devices. 
Bath and shower flow-reduction devices shall comply with 
IAPMO IGC 244. 


L 402.9 Commercial Pre-Rinse Spray Valves. The flow < 


rate for a pre-rinse spray valve installed in a commercial kitchen 
to remove food waste from cookware and dishes before clean- 
ing shall not be more than the maximum flow rate, as specified 
in Table L 402.9. Where pre-rinse spray valves with maximum 
flow rates of 1.0 gpm (3.8 L/m) or less are installed, the static 
pressure shall be not less than 30 psi (207 kPa). Commercial 
kitchen pre-rinse spray valves shall be equipped with an integral 
automatic shutoff. 


TABLE L 402.9 
COMMERCIAL PRE-RINSE SPRAY VALVE 
MAXIMUM FLOW RATE 


MAXIMUM FLOW RATE 


PRODUCT CLASS BY SPRAY FORCE 


(GPM) 
Product Class 1 (< 5.0 ounces-force) 1.00 
Product Class 2 (> 5.0 ounces-force 120 


and x 8.0 ounces-force) 
Product Class 3 (7 8.0 ounces-force) 1.28 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 3.785 L/min, 1 ounce-force = 0.278 N. 


L 402.10 Emergency Safety Showers and Eye Wash «4 


Stations. Emergency safety showers and emergency eyewash 
stations shall not be limited to their water supply flow rates. 


L 402.11 Drinking Fountains and Bottle Filling Sta- |<< 


tions. Bottle filling stations shall be included on or used as 
a substitute to meet the requirements of drinking fountains in 
at least 50 percent of the requirements for drinking fountains. 
Bottle filling stations and drinking fountains shall be self- 
closing. 


L 403.0 Appliances. 


L 403.1 Dishwashers. Residential and commercial dish- 
washers shall comply with the Energy Star program require- 
ments. 


L 403.2 Clothes Washers. Residential clothes washers 
shall comply with the Energy Star program requirements. 
Commercial clothes washers shall comply with Energy Star 
program requirements, where such requirements exist. 


L 404.0 Occupancy Specific Water Efficiency Require- 
ments. 


L 404.1 Commercial Food Service. Commercial food 
service facilities shall comply with the water efficiency 
requirements in Section L 404.2 through Section L 404.7.5. 


L 404.2 Ice Makers. Ice makers shall be air cooled and shall 
be in accordance with Energy Star for energy use for com- 
mercial ice machines. Ice makers producing cubed-type ice 
shall not exceed 20 gallons (75.7 L) of water per 100 pounds 
(45.4 kg) of ice produced. Ice makers producing nugget and 
flake ice shall not exceed 14 gallons (63.6 L) of water per 100 
pounds (45.4 kg) of ice produced. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


L 404.3 Food Steamers. Boilerless type steamers shall 
consume not more than 2.0 gallons (7.6 L) per compartment. 
Boiler type steamers shall not consume more than 1.5 gallons 
(5.7 L) per pan per hour. 


L 404.4 Combination Ovens. Combination ovens shall 
not use water in the convection mode except when utilizing 
a moisture nozzle for food products in the oven. The total 
amount of water used by the moisture nozzle in the convec- 
tion mode shall not exceed a half a gallon per hour per oven 
cavity. When operating in the steamer mode, combination 
ovens shall not consume more than 1.5 gallons per hour (gph) 
(5.7 L/h) per pan. 

L 404.5 Grease Interceptors. Grease interceptor mainte- 
nance procedures shall not include post-pumping/cleaning 
refill using potable water. Refill shall be by connected appli- 
ance accumulated discharge only. 


L 404.5.1 Temperature. Grease Interceptors shall be 
designed and installed to maintain a mean temperature 
not exceeding 95?F (35?C). FOG (fats, oils, and greases) 
disposal systems in compliance with ASME A112.14.6 
using biological cultures shall not exceed 104?F (40?C). 
Passive or active cooling and heat recovery to be 
employed where applicable. 
L 404.6 Dipper Well Faucets. Where dipper wells have a 
permanent water supply, the faucet shall have metered or sen- 
sor activated flow. The volume of water dispensed into a dip- 
per well in each activation cycle of a self-closing fixture 
fitting shall not exceed the water capacity of the dipper well, 
and the maximum flow shall not exceed 0.2 gpm (0.8 L/m) at 
a supply pressure of 60 psi (414 kPa). 


L 404.7 Food Waste Devices. Where installed, food waste 
devices shall be in accordance with Section L 404.7.1 through 
Section L 404.7.5. 


L 404.71 Pulpers and Mechanical Strainers. The 
water use for pulpers or mechanical strainers shall not 
exceed 2 gpm (7.6 L/m). A flow restrictor shall be 
installed on the water supply to limit the water flow. 


L 404.7.2 Food Waste Disposers. The water use for 
the food waste grinder shall not exceed 8 gpm (30.3 L/m) 
under full load condition and 1 gpm (3.8 L/m) under no- 
load condition. Flow restrictors shall be installed on the 
water supply to limit the water flow rate to a maximum 
of 8 gpm (30.3 L/m). A load sensing device shall be 
installed to monitor current demand and regulate water 
flow. 

L 404.73 Time Out and Shut Off. Pulpers, mechan- 
ical strainers, and food waste disposers shall have a time 
out system with push button to reactivate. The maximum 
allowable run time cycle shall be 10 minutes. 

L 404.7.4 Sink Drain Outlets. Where a strainer or bas- 
ket is installed, they shall be readily removable. 

L 404.7.5 Strainer Baskets. Strainer (scrapper) bas- 
kets shall either fit over a sink compartment or be 
attached to a drain system. The strainer baskets shall be 
readily removable for emptying. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


L 404.8 Tempering Water. The discharge waste from com- 
mercial dishwashers, ware washers, combination ovens, and 
food steamers that exceeds 140°F (60°C) shall not be tem- 
pered with potable water. 


L 404.9 Medical and Laboratory Facilities. Medical and « 
laboratory facilities shall comply with the water efficiency 
requirements in Section L 404.10 through Section L 404.12. 


L 404.10 Steam Sterilizers. Controls shall be installed to << 
limit the discharge temperature of condensate or water from 
steam sterilizers to 140°F (60°C) or less. A venturi-type vac- 
uum system shall not be utilized with vacuum sterilizers. 


L 404.11 X-Ray Film Processing Units. Processors for << 
X-ray film exceeding 6 inches (152 mm) in any dimension 
shall be equipped with water recycling units. 


L 404.12 Exhaust Hood Liquid Scrubber Systems. < 
Liquid scrubber systems for exhaust hoods and ducts shall be 

of the recirculation type. Liquid scrubber systems for perchlo- 

ric acid exhaust hoods and ducts shall be equipped with a timer- 
controlled water recirculation system. The collection sump for 
perchloric acid exhaust systems shall be designed to drain auto- 
matically after the wash down process has completed. 


L 405.0 Leak Detection and Control. 


L 405.1 General. Where installed, leak detection and con- 
trol devices shall comply with ANSI/CAN/IAPMO Z1349. 
Leak detection with control devices shall not be installed 
where they isolate fire sprinkler systems. 


L 406.0 Fountains and Other Water Features. 


L 406.1 Use of Alternate Water Source for Special 
Water Features. Special water features such as ponds and 
water fountains shall be provided with reclaimed (recycled) 
water, rainwater, or on-site treated nonpotable water where 
the source and capacity are available on the premises and 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


L 407.0 Meters. 


L 407.1 Required. A water meter shall be required for each 
building site connected to a public water system, including 
municipally supplied reclaimed (recycled) water. In other 
than single-family houses, a dedicated meter shall be installed 
in accordance with Table L 407.1. 

L 407.2 Approval. Dedicated meters, other than water util- 
ity meters shall be approved by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction for the intended use. 

L 4073 Remote Data Transfer Requirements. Where 
more than 10 non-utility-owned water meters are located at a 
building site, the meters shall include remote data transfer 
capability to collect and analyze the data at a single location. 


L 407.4 Access. Meters and submeters shall be accessible. 


L 408.0 Condensate Recovery. 


L 408.1 General. Condensate is permitted to be used as on- 
site treated nonpotable water when collected, stored, and 
treated in accordance with Section 1506.0. 


503 


APPENDIX L 


TABLE L 407.1 
DEDICATED WATER METERING REQUIREMENTS 


APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 


Cooling Towers The makeup water supply to cooling towers, evaporative condensers, and fluid coolers. Cooling 
towers sharing a common basin can be grouped together using one meter. 


Evaporative Coolers The makeup water supply to an evaporative cooler having an air flow exceeding 30 000 cubic feet 
per minute (ft/min). 


Fluid Coolers and Chillers – Open The makeup water supply on water-cooled fluid coolers and chillers not utilizing closed- loop recir- 
Systems culation. 


Hydronic Cooling Systems — Closed |Systems with 50 ton or greater of cooling capacity and where a make-up water supply is connected. 
Loop 


Hydronic Heating Systems The makeup water supply to one or more boilers collectively exceeding 1 000 000 British thermal 
units per hour (Btu/h). 
Industrial Processes The water supply to an industrial water-using process where the average consumption exceeds 


1000 gallons per day (gal/d). Like equipment sharing one common water supply can be grouped 
together using one meter. 

Exception: Processes using untreated water where the water is directly returned to the original 
source after use. 


Landscape Irrigation Landscape irrigation water where either of the following conditions exist: 

(1) Total accumulated landscape area with in-ground irrigation system exceeds 2500 square feet 
(ft), or 

(2) Total accumulated landscape area using an automatic irrigation controller exceeds 1500 square 
feet (#2) 

Exception: Where the water purveyor provides a separate water supply meter that serves only the 

irrigation system, an additional dedicated meter is not required. 


Onsite Water Collection Systems Potable or reclaimed water supplies for supplementing onsite alternative water collection systems. 


Ornamental Water Features Potable or reclaimed water supplies for ornamental water features where the water feature uses an 
automatic refill valve. 


Roof Spray Systems Roof spray systems for irrigating vegetated roofs or thermal conditioning covering an area greater 
than 300 square feet (ft^). 

Exception: Temporary above-surface spray systems connected to a hose bibb and without an auto- 
matic controller are not required to have a dedicated meter 


Tenant Buildings - Common Areas | Water supplies used in common areas of a site. The dedicated meter for common area water use 
shall not include water supplied inside tenant space. Water supplies for sanitary fixtures and other 
water use in common areas can be grouped together for metering requirements, except where dedi- 
cated water meter installations are otherwise required. 


Tenant Spaces - Residential All water supplies to each residential tenant space for indoor water use. 

Exception: Where a water purveyor has individual meters for each tenant space, and the other 
meter requirements included in Table L 407.1 do not apply, no additional dedicated meter is 
required. 


Tenant Spaces - Non-residential, car | All water supplies to individual non-residential tenant spaces for indoor water use where any of the 

washes following conditions exist: 

(1) The nominal size of a water supply pipe(s) to the individual tenant space is greater than ^ 
inch, or 

(2) Water consumption within in the tenant space is estimated or expected to average greater than 
1000 gallons/day (gal/d). 

Where water is supplied to tenant space that is not required to have dedicated meter, the water sup- 

ply pipe (s) shall be accessible to install a meter. 

Exception: Where a water purveyor has individual meters for each tenant space and the other 

meter requirements included in Table L 407.1 do not apply, no additional dedicated meter is 

required. 


For SI units: 1 gallon per day = 3.785 L/day, 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m?, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, 1 cubic foot per 
minute (CFM) = 0.4719 L/s, 1 ton = 3.5169 kW 


504 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


L 408.1.1 Condensate Drainage Recovery. Con- 
densate from air-conditioning, boiler and steam systems 
used to supply water for non-potable water systems shall 
be in accordance with Section 1506.0. 


L 409.0 Water-Powered Sump Pumps. 


L 409.1 General. Sump pumps powered by potable or 
reclaimed (recycled) water pressure shall be used as an emer- 

| gency backup pump and shall comply with IAPMO PS 119. 
The water-powered pump shall be equipped with a battery 
powered alarm having a minimum rating of 85 dBa at 10 feet 
(3048 mm). Water-powered pumps shall have a water effi- 
ciency factor of pumping at least 1.4 gallons (5.3 L) of water 
to a height of 10 feet (3048 mm) for every gallon of water 
used to operate the pump, measured at a water pressure of 60 
psi (414 kPa). Pumps shall be labeled as to the gallons of 
water pumped per gallon of potable water consumed. 


Water-powered stormwater sump pumps shall be 
equipped with a reduced pressure principle backflow preven- 
tion assembly. 


L 410.0 Water Softeners and Treatment Devices. 


L 410.1 Water Softeners. Water softeners shall be listed to 

| NSF/ANSI 44. Water softeners shall have a rated salt effi- 
ciency exceeding 3400 grains (gr) (0.222 kg) of total hard- 
ness exchange per pound (0.5 kg) of salt, based on sodium 
chloride (NaCl) equivalency, and shall not generate more than 
4 gallons (15.1 L) of water per 1000 grains (0.0647 kg) of 
hardness removed during the service cycle. 


L 410.2 Water Softener Limitations. In residential build- 
ings, where the supplied potable water hardness is equal to 
or less than 8 grains per gallon (gr/gal) (137 mg/L) measured 
as total calcium carbonate equivalents, water softening equip- 
ment that discharges water into the wastewater system during 
the service cycle shall not be allowed, except as required for 
medical purposes. 


L 410.3 Point-of-Use Reverse Osmosis Water Treat- 

ment Systems. Reverse osmosis water treatment systems 
| shall be equipped with automatic shutoff valves to prevent 
discharge when there is no call for producing treated water. 
Reverse osmosis water treatment systems shall comply with 
NSF/ANSI 58 and ASSE 1086. 
L 410.4 Drinking Water Treatment Systems. Drinking 
water treatment systems shall be listed to WQA/ASPE/ANSI 
S-803. 


L 411.0 Landscape Irrigation Systems. 


L 411.1 General. Where landscape irrigation systems are 
installed, they shall be in accordance with Section L 411.1.1 
through Section L 411.17. 


L 411.1.1 Irrigation Design and Installation. The 
Authority Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to 
require landscape irrigation contractors, installers, or 
designers to demonstrate competency. The system shall be 
designed and record drawings showing changes during 
installation shall be made available for the owner and for 
any required inspections. Where required by the Authority 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


Having Jurisdiction, the contractor, installer, or designer 
shall be licensed, certified, or both to perform such work. 


L 411.2 Plant and Irrigation System Limitations. Nui- 
sance, invasive and noxious plants as defined by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction shall not be used in the landscape. 
Plants not requiring supplement irrigation and not principally 
used as an athletic field or public recreation shall be used in 
no less than 60 percent of the landscape that is not principally 
used as an athletic field or public recreation. Inground irriga- 
tion system shall not be installed in more than 40 percent of 
the landscaped area. 


Exceptions: 


(1) Where average annual rainfall is less than 12 inches (305 
mm) and in landscape areas where the plant materials 
have an annual ETc of not exceeding 15 inches (381 
mm), an in-ground irrigation system shall be allowed. 

(2) Where neither potable or reclaimed (recycled) water is 
used in the irrigation system, an in-ground irrigation sys- 
tem shall be allowed in 100 percent of the landscaped 
area and vegetative roofs. 


L 411.3 Vegetative Roofs and Walls. Irrigation systems 
using potable water for vegetative roofs and walls are pro- 
hibited. 


L 411.4 Maximum Velocity. Velocity of water flow shall 
not exceed 5 feet per second (1.5 m/s) for thermoplastic irri- 
gation pipes. Velocity of water flow shall not exceed 7.5 feet 
per second (2.3 m/s) for metal irrigation pipes. 

L 411.5 Backflow Protection. Potable water and reclaimed 
water supplies to landscape irrigation systems shall be pro- 
tected from backflow in accordance with this code and the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

L 411.6 Use of Alternate Water Sources for Land- 
scape Irrigation. Where available by pre-existing treatment, 
storage, or distribution network, and where approved by the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction, alternative water source(s) 
shall be utilized for landscape irrigation. Where adequate 
capacity and volumes of pre-existing alternative water sources 
are available, the irrigation system shall be designed to use a 
minimum of 75 percent of alternative water for the annual irri- 
gation demand before supplemental potable water is used. 


Exception: Plants grown for food production for direct 
human consumption. 


L 411.6.1 Master Valve. Where continuously pressur- 
ized alternate water sources supply an existing irrigation 
system, a master valve shall be installed at the point 
where the alternate water sources supply piping connects 
to the existing irrigation system downstream of the back- 
flow preventer where required. 

L 411.6.2 Identification. Where alternate water 
sources supply an existing irrigation system, the existing 
sprinkler heads, valve boxes, the continuously pressur- 
ized line supplying the irrigation master valve, or any 
other components required by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, shall be colored purple. The piping supply- 
ing the irrigation master valve shall be identified in 
accordance with Chapter 15 of this code. 


L 411.6.2.1 Additional Zones. Newly installed 
zones shall have purple pipe. 


505 


« 


APPENDIX L 


уу L 411.7 Irrigation Control Systems. Where installed as 
part of a landscape irrigation system, irrigation control sys- 
tems shall: 


(1) Automatically adjust the irrigation schedule to respond to 
plant water needs determined by weather or soil mois- 
ture conditions. Shall be listed to the EPA WaterSense 
Specification for Weather-Based Irrigation Controllers 
or the EPA WaterSense Specification for Soil Moisture- 
Based Irrigation Controllers. 


(2) Utilize onsite sensors or remote weather data to inhibit or 
to suspend irrigation when adequate soil moisture is pres- 
ent or during a rainfall or freezing conditions. 


(3) Utilize either one or more on-site sensors or a weather 
based irrigation controller listed to the US EPA 
WaterSense Weather Based Irrigation Controllers Spec- 
Ification to suspend irrigation where adequate soil mois- 
ture is present for plant growth. 


(4) Have the capability to program multiple and different run 
times for each irrigation zone to enable cycling of water 
applications and durations to mitigate water flowing off 
of the intended irrigation zone. 


(5) Be capable of indicating to the user when it is not receiv- 
ing a signal or local sensor input. 


(6) Be capable of allowing for a manual operation trou- 
bleshooting test cycle and shall automatically return to 
sensor input mode within some period of time as desig- 
nated by the manufacturer, even when the switch is still 
positioned for manual operation. 


(7) The site-specific settings of the irrigation control system 
shall be posted at the control system location. The posted 
data, where applicable to the settings of the controller, 
shall include: 


(a) Precipitation rate for each zone. 

(b) Plant evapotranspiration coefficients for each zone. 
(c) Soil absorption rate for each zone. 

(d) Rain sensor settings. 

(e) Soil moisture setting. 


(f) Peak demand schedule including run times for each 
zone and the number of cycles to mitigate runoff and 
monthly adjustments or percentage change from 
peak demand schedule. 


L 411.8 Irrigation Flow Sensing System. On commer- 
cial landscape irrigation systems, an irrigation flow sensing 
system shall be installed that shall interface with the control 
system to suspend irrigation for abnormal flow conditions. If 
equipped with totalizer capabilities, the irrigation flow sens- 
ing system shall also function as a meter for irrigation water. 


У) L 411.9 Low Flow Irrigation. Irrigation zones using low 
flow irrigation emitters [with emitter flow rates not to exceed 
6.3 gallons (24 L) per hour] shall comply with ASABE/ICC 
802 Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard and 
shall be equipped with filters sized according to the manu- 
facturer's recommendation for the specific low flow emitter, 
and with a pressure regulator installed upstream of the irri- 
gation emission devices as necessary to reduce the operating 
water pressure in accordance with the manufacturers’ equip- 
ment requirements. 


506 


L 411.10 Mulched Planting Areas. Only low flow emit- 4 
ters with flow rates not to exceed 6.3 gallons (24 L) per hour | 
are allowed to be installed in mulched planting areas with 
vegetation taller than 12 inches (305 mm). 


L 411.11 System Performance Requirements. The < 
landscape irrigation system shall be designed and installed 
to: 


(1) Prevent irrigation water from runoff out of the irrigation 
zone. 


(2) Prevent water in the supply line drainage from draining 
out between irrigation events. 


(3) Not allow irrigation water to be applied onto or enter non- 
targeted areas including adjacent property and vegetation 
areas, adjacent hydrozones not requiring the irrigation 
water to meet its irrigation demand, non-vegetative areas, 
impermeable surfaces, roadways, and structures. 


Exception: Landscape features outside of the public right of 
way such as paved walkways, jogging paths, and golf cart 
paths, are exempted from this requirement where run off 
drains into the same hydrozone without puddling. 


L 411.12 Narrow or Irregularly Shaped Landscape << 
Areas. Narrow or irregularly shaped landscape areas, less 
than 4 feet (1219 mm) in any direction across opposing 
boundaries, shall not be irrigated by an irrigation emission 
device except low flow emitters with flow rates not to exceed 
6.3 gallons (24 L) per hour. 


L 411.13 Irrigation System Inspection and Perform- 
ance Check. The irrigation system shall be inspected to ver- 
ify compliance with the irrigation design in accordance with 
the following: 

(1) Inspection and performance check shall be by an inde- 
pendent third party having credentials in accordance with 
the US EPA WaterSense program or the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction. 

(2 


МУ 


Sprinklers shall be installed as specified with proper 
spacing and required nozzle. 


G 


— 


Sprinklers shall be activated and visually inspected for 

covering areas without causing overspray or runoff. 

(4) Valves shall be installed as specified. 

(5) Drip irrigation systems shall be inspected to verify the 
proper valve, pressure regulation, filtering device, loca- 
tion of flush valves, and that the installed emitters com- 
ply with the irrigation plan. 

(6 


МУ 


Control system shall be installed as specified and listed 
as a US EPA WaterSense labeled controller, and all sen- 
sors shall be installed and verified for proper installation 
and operation. 


(7 


МУ 


The peak demand irrigation schedule shall be posted near 
the controller, or the scheduling parameters for the con- 
troller shall be listed for each station including cycle and 
soak times. 


(8 


— 


Record drawings of the irrigation system shall be com- 
pleted and provided for the irrigation inspection. 


(9 


кем 


An inspection report shall be provided to the property 
owner or management company identifying problems 
and what corrective actions are required. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


» 


L 411.14 Sprinkler Head Installations. All installed 
sprinkler heads shall comply with ASABE/ICC 802 or other 
approved standard(s). 


L 411.14.1 Sprinkler Heads in Common Irrigation 
Zones. Sprinkler heads installed in irrigation zones 
served by a common valve shall be limited to applying 
water to plants with similar irrigation needs, and shall have 
matched precipitation rates (identical inches of water appli- 
cation per hour plus or minus 7 percent as labeled or 
declared in manufacturer’s published performance data). 


L 411.14.2 Sprinkler Head Pressure Regulation. 
Sprinkler heads shall utilize pressure regulating devices 
(as part of an irrigation system or integral to the sprinkler 
body) to maintain manufacturer’s recommended operat- 
ing pressure for each sprinkler and nozzle type. Spray 
sprinkler bodies with integral pressure regulation shall 
be listed to the EPA WaterSense Specification for Spray 
Sprinkler Bodies. 


L 411.14.3 Pop-up Type Sprinkler Heads. Where 
pop-up type sprinkler heads are installed, the sprinkler 
heads shall rise to a height above vegetation level and of 
not less than 4 inches (102 mm) above the soil level 
where emitting water. 


L 411.14.4 Sprinkler Head Maximum Precipita- 
tion Rate. Where the slope of the landscape exceeds 25 
percent, the precipitation rate of sprinkler heads shall not 
exceed 1.75 inches (44 mm) per hour when tested to 
ASABE/ICC 802. 


L 411.15 Outside Hose Bibbs. Outside hose bibbs shall be 
allowed on irrigation pipe downstream of the backflow pre- 
venter. Hose bibbs supplying water from the irrigation system 
shall be indicated by posted signs marked with the words: 
“CAUTION: NONPOTABLE WATER. DO NOT DRINK” 
and the symbol in Figure 1505.10 of this code. 


L 411.16 Depth of Irrigation Pipe. Irrigation pipe down- 
stream from the backflow preventer shall be buried at a min- 
imum depth according to Section L 411.16.1 and Section L 
411.16.2. 


L 411.16.1 Landscape Areas. Irrigated landscaped 
areas not exceeding 10 000 square feet (929 m?) shall have 
irrigation main lines buried a minimum of 12 inches (305 
mm) and irrigation lateral lines buried a minimum of 8 
inches (203 mm). Irrigated landscaped areas greater than 
10 000 square feet (929 m?) shall have irrigation main lines 
buried a minimum of 18 inches (457 mm) and irrigation 
lateral lines buried a minimum of 12 inches (305 mm). 


L 411.16.2 Vehicular Surfaces. Irrigation pipe 
installed under vehicular paving and pervious pavers, 
including landscaped fire lanes, shall be sleeved with a 
minimum of one 1-inch pipe (25 mm) size greater than 
the irrigation pipe and buried at a minimum depth of 24 
inches (610 mm) in all cases. 


L 411.17 Backfill. All excavation for irrigation pipe installa- 
tion shall be backfilled in thin layers to 12 inches (305 mm) 
with clean earth, which shall not contain stones, boulders, cin- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


derfill, frozen earth, construction debris, or other materials that 
would damage or break the piping. Fill shall be properly com- 
pacted. Suitable precautions shall be taken to ensure perma- 
nent stability for pipe laid in filled or made ground. 


L 412.0 Trap Seal Protection. 


L 412.1 Water Supplied Trap Primers. Water supplied 
trap primers shall be electronic or pressure activated and shall 
use not more than 30 gallons (114 L) per year per drain. Where 
an alternate water source, as defined by this code, 1s used for 
fixture flushing or other uses in the same room, the alternate 
water source shall be used for the trap primer water supply. 


Exception: Flushometer tailpiece trap primers in accordance 
with ASSE 1044 or IAPMO PS 76. | 


L 412.2 Drainage Type Trap Seal Primer Devices. 
Drainage type trap seal primer devices shall not be limited in 
the amount of water they discharge. 


L 413.0 Vehicle Wash Facilities. 


L 413.1 Automatic. The maximum make-up water use for 
automobile washing shall not exceed 40 gallons (151 L) per 
vehicle for in-bay automatic car washes and 35 gallons (132 
L) for conveyor and express type car washes. 


L 413.2 Self-Service. Spray wands and foamy brushes 
shall use not more than 3.0 gpm (0.19 L/s). 


L 413.3 Reverse Osmosis. Spot-free reverse osmosis dis- 
charge (reject) water shall be recycled. 


L 413.4 Towel Ringers. Towel ringers shall have a positive 
shutoff valve. Spray nozzles shall be replaced annually. 


Exception: Bus and large commercial vehicle washes are 
exempt from the requirements of this section. 


L 501.0 Water Heating Design, Equipment, and Instal- 
lation. 


L 501.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall establish 
the means of conserving potable and nonpotable water and 
energy associated with the generation and use of hot water in 
a building. This includes provisions for the hot water distri- 
bution system, which is the portion of the potable water dis- 
tribution system between a water heating device and the 
plumbing fixtures, including dedicated return piping and 
appurtenances to the water heating device in a recirculation 
system. 


L 501.2 Insulation. Hot water supply and return piping shall 
be thermally insulated. The wall thickness of the insulation 
shall be equal to the nominal diameter of the pipe up to 2 
inches (50 mm). The wall thickness shall be not less than 2 
inches (51 mm) for nominal pipe diameters exceeding 2 
inches (50 mm). The conductivity of the insulation [k-factor 
(Btusin/(heft?*°F))], measured radially, shall not be more than 
0.28 [Btuein/(h*f?*?F)] [0.04 W/(m*K)]. Hot water piping to 
be insulated shall be installed such that insulation 1s continu- 
ous. Pipe insulation shall be installed to within 1⁄4 of an inch 
(6.4 mm) of appliances, appurtenances, fixtures, structural 
members, or a wall where the pipe passes through to connect 
to a fixture within 24 inches (610 mm). 


507 


APPENDIX L 


Exceptions: 


(1) Where the hot water pipe is installed in a wall that is not 
of a width to accommodate the pipe and insulation, the 
insulation thickness shall be permitted to have the max- 
imum thickness that the wall is capable of accommodat- 
ing and not less than % of an inch (12.7 mm) thick. 


(2) Hot water supply piping exposed under sinks, lavatories, 
and similar fixtures. 


L 501.2.1 Pipe Supports. Pipe supports shall be 
installed on the outside of the pipe insulation. 


Exception: Vertical supports, and horizontal and vertical 
anchors shall be installed on the pipe inside the pipe insu- 
lation. 


L 501.2.2 Building Cavities. Building cavities used 
for hot water supply and return piping shall be large 
enough to accommodate the combined diameter of the 
pipe plus the insulation, plus any other objects in the cav- 
ity that the piping must cross. 


L 501.3 Recirculation Systems. Recirculation systems 
shall comply with Section L 501.3.1 and Section L 501.3.2. 


L 501.3.1 For Low-Rise Residential Buildings. 
Circulating hot water systems shall be arranged so that 
the circulating pump(s) are capable of being turned off 
(automatically or manually) where the hot water system 
Is not in operation. [ASHRAE 90.2-2007:7.2] 


L 501.3.2 For Pumps Between Boilers and Stor- 
age Tanks. Where used to maintain storage tank water 
temperature, recirculating pumps shall be equipped with 
controls limiting operation to a period from the start of 
the heating cycle to a maximum of 5 minutes after the 
end of the heating cycle. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.4.4] 


L 501.4 Recirculation Pump Controls. Pump controls 
shall include on-demand activation or time clocks combined 
with temperature sensing. Time clock controls for pumps shall 
not let the pump operate more than 15 minutes every hour. 
Temperature sensors shall stop circulation where the temper- 
ature set point is reached and shall be located on the circula- 
tion loop at or near the last fixture. The pump, pump controls, 
and temperature sensors shall be accessible. Pump operation 
shall be limited to the building's hours of operation. 


L 501.4.1 Hot Water On-Demand Pumping Sys- 
tems. Hot water on-demand pumping systems manually 
actuated or automatically activated hot water pumping 
systems shall comply with IAPMO PS 115. 


L 501.5 Temperature Maintenance Controls. Systems 
designed to maintain usage temperatures in hot-water pipes, 
such as recirculating hot water systems or heat trace, shall be 
equipped with automatic time switches or other controls that 
are capable of being set to switch off the usage temperature 
maintenance system during extended periods where hot water 
is not required. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.4.2] 


L 501.6 System Balancing. Systems with multiple recir- 
culation zones shall be balanced to distribute hot water uni- 
formly, or they shall be operated with a pump for each zone. 
The circulation pump controls shall comply with the provi- 
sions of Section L 501.4. 


508 


L 501.7 Flow Balancing Valves. Flow balancing valves 
shall be a factory preset automatic flow control valve, a flow 
regulating valve, or a balancing valve with memory stop. 


L 501.8 Air Elimination. Provision shall be made for the 
elimination of air from the return system. 


L 501.9 Gravity or Thermosyphon Systems. Gravity or 
thermosyphon systems are prohibited. 


L 502.0 Service Hot Water — Low-Rise Residential 
Buildings. 

L 502.1 General. The service water heating system for sin- 
gle-family houses, multi-family structures of three stories or 
fewer above grade, and modular houses shall comply with 
Section L 502.2 through Section L 502.7.3. The service water 
heating system of all other buildings shall comply with Sec- 
tion L 503.0. 


L 502.2 Water Heaters and Storage Tanks. Residential- 
type water heaters, pool heaters, and unfired water heater stor- 
age tanks shall comply with the minimum performance 
requirements specified by federal law. 


Unfired storage water heating equipment shall have a 
heat loss through the tank surface area of less than 6.5 British 
thermal units per square foot hour [Btu/(f?*h)] (20.5 W/m’). 
[ASHRAE 90.2-2007:7.1] 


L 502.3 Recirculation Systems. Recirculation systems 
shall comply with the provisions of Section L 501.3. 


L 502.4 Central Water Heating Equipment. Service 
water heating equipment (central systems) that do not fall 
under the requirements for residential-type service water heat- 
ing equipment addressed in Section L 502.2 shall comply with 
the applicable requirements for service water-heating equip- 
ment found in Section L 503.0. [ASHRAE 90.2-2007:7.3] 


L 502.5 Insulation. Insulation for hot water and return pip- 
ing shall comply with the provisions of Section L 501.2. 


L 502.6 Hard Water. Where water has hardness equal to or 
exceeding 9 grains per gallon (gr/gal) (154 mg/L) measured 
as total calcium carbonate equivalents, the water supply line 
to water heating equipment in new one- and two-family 
dwellings shall be roughed-in to allow for the installation of 
water treatment equipment. 


L 502.7 Maximum Volume and Length of Hot Water. 
The maximum volume of water contained in a hot water 
branch shall be in accordance with Section L 502.7.1. The 
maximum length per volume of piping shall comply with Sec- 
tion L 502.7.2. 


L 502.71 Maximum Volume of Hot Water in a 
Branch. The water volume per foot of piping shall be 
calculated using Table L 502.7.1. The maximum volume 
of water in a fixture branch between any source of hot 
water (water heaters, recirculation loops and electrically 
heat traced pipe shall be considered sources of hot water) 
and the fixture fitting shall be: 


(1) 24 oz (710 mL) where a single branch serves a sin- 
gle fixture. 

(2) 40 oz (1183 mL) where a series branch incorporat- 
ing one or more flow-through design configurations 
that serves two or more fixtures. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


(3) 60 oz (1774 mL) where a ring branch incorporating 
two or more flow-through design configurations that 
serves two or more fixtures. 


Exceptions: 


(1) The maximum volume of a single branch or series 
branch between any source of hot water and a 
kitchen sink and dishwasher located on an island or 
a peninsula where the floor is a concrete slab shall 
not contain more than 40 oz (1183 mL). 


(2) The maximum volume ofa single branch to a stand- 
alone tub shall not contain more than 80 oz (2366 
mL). 

L 502.72 Maximum Length Per Volume of Water 
in a Branch. For fixture branches in accordance with 
Section L 502.7.1, the maximum length of piping shall be 
calculated using Table L 502.7.2(1) through Table 
502.7.2(4). Where a fixture fitting shut off valve (supply 
stop) is installed ahead of the fixture fitting, the maxi- 
mum length is measured between the source of hot water 
and the fixture fitting shut off valve (supply stop). 


L 502.7.3 Hot Water System Submeters. Where a 
hot water pipe from a circulation loop or electric heat 
trace line is equipped with a submeter, the hot water dis- 
tribution system downstream of the submeter shall have 
either an end-of-line hot water circulation pump or shall 
be electrically heat traced. The maximum volume of 
water in a branch from the circulation loop or electric 
heat trace line downstream of the submeter shall not 
exceed 16 oz (473 mL). 


Where there is no circulation loop or electric heat 
traced line downstream of the submeter, the submeter 
shall be located within 2 feet (610 mm) of the central hot 
water system; or the branch line to the submeter shall be 
circulated or heat traced to within 2 feet (610 mm) of the 
submeter. The maximum volume from the submeter to 
each fixture shall not exceed 32 oz (946 mL). 


The circulation pump controls shall comply with the 
provisions of Section L 501.4. 


APPENDIX L 


L 503.0 Service Hot Water — Other Than Low-Rise 
Residential Buildings. 

L 503.1 General. The service hot water, other than single- 
family houses, multifamily structures of three stories or fewer 
above grade, and modular houses shall comply with this sec- 


tion. 


L 503.1.1 New Buildings. Service water-heating sys- 
tems and equipment shall comply with the requirements 
of this section as described in Section L 503.2. 
[ASHRAE 90.1:7.1.1.1] 


L 503.1.2 Additions to Existing Buildings. Service 
water heating systems and equipment shall comply with 
the requirements of this section. 


Exception: Where the service water-heating to an addi- 
tion 1s provided by existing service water-heating sys- 
tems and equipment, such systems and equipment shall 
not be required to be in accordance with this appendix. 
However, new systems or equipment installed shall be 
in accordance with specific requirements applicable to 
those systems and equipment. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.1.1.2] 


L 503.1.3 Alterations to Existing Buildings. Build- 
ing service water-heating equipment installed as a direct 
replacement for existing building service water-heating 
equipment shall be in accordance with the requirements 
of Section L 503.0 applicable to the equipment being 
replaced. New and replacement piping shall comply with 
Section L 503.3.3. 

Exception: Compliance shall not be required where 


there 1s insufficient space or access to meet these require- 
ments. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.1.1.3] 


L 503.2 Compliance Paths. Service water heating sys- 
tems and equipment shall comply with Section L 503.2.1 and 
Section L 503.22. 


L 503.2.1 Requirements for All Compliance Paths. 
Service water heating systems and equipment shall comply 
with Section L 503.1, Section L 503.3, and Section L 
503.5. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.2.1] 


TABLE L 502.71 
WATER VOLUME FOR DISTRIBUTION PIPING MATERIALS’ 


OUNCES OF WATER PER FOOT LENGTH OF PIPING 


eee COPPER | COPPER | COPPER pe CPVC PEX-AL- PEX PE-AL- PE CPVC |PEXCTS| PE-RT PP PP PP pis 
(inch) M L K SDR 11 SCH 40 SCH80 | SDR9 | SDR9 | SDR6 РВ 73 | SDR 11 SDR 11 
ys 1.06 0.97 0.84 0.68 1.17 0.59 0.59 0.85 0.64 0.64 0.85 1.02 NA 1.48 

№ 1.69 1.55 1.45 1.23 1.89 1.22 1.22 1.44 1.18 1.18 1.35 1.64 МА 2.33 

54 3.43 3.22 2.90 2.52 3.38 3.28 3.28 2:12 2.35 2.35 2.14 2.54 NA 3.68 

1 5.81 5.49 5:17 4.24 5.53 5.37 5.37 4.58 3.88 3.88 3.46 4.22 МА 5.83 

1⁄4 8.70 8.36 8.09 6.38 9.66 8.65 8.65 8.23 5.80 5.80 5.47 6.59 NA 9.35 

1% 12.18 11.83 11.45 8.95 13.20 13.91 13.91 11.38 8.08 8.08 8.64 10.27 МА 12.27 

2 21.50 20.58 20.04 15.38 | 21.88 23.16 23.16 19.11 13.86 13.86 | 13.64 | 16.42 NA 19.19 


For SI units: 1 ounce = 29.573 mL, 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm 
* NA: Not Applicable 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


509 


« 


« 


APPENDIX L 


TABLE L 502.72(1) 
LENGTH (FT) PER VOLUME OF PIPING 


COPPER TYPE M COPPERTYPEL COPPER TYPE К 
ыы, о, 24 о2 40 oz 60 oz 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 
3% 22.7 37.8 56.7 24.9 41.4 62.1 28.4 47.4 71.1 
2 14.2 23.7 35.5 15.5 25.8 38.7 16.5 27.6 41.4 
3/4 7.0 11.6 17.5 7.5 12.4 18.6 8.3 13.8 20.7 
1 4.1 6.9 10.3 4.4 7.3 10.9 4.6 727 11.6 
ПА 2.8 4.6 6.9 2.9 4.8 732. 3.0 4.9 7.4 
115 2.0 3.3 4.9 2.0 3.4 5.1 2.1 3.5 52 
2 1.1 1.9 2.8 1.2 1.9 2.9 1.2 2.0 3.0 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 ounce = 29.573 mL, 1 inch = 25 mm 


TABLE L 502.72 (2) 
LENGTH (FT) PER VOLUME OF PIPING 


CPVC CTS SDR 11 CPVC SCH 40 PIPE CPVC SCH 80 PIPE CPVC SDR 11 PIPE 
Mo ries 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 24 oz 40 oz 60 oz 
3/8 35.5 59.1 88.6 20.5 34.2 51.4 28.3 47.2 70.7 16.2 27.0 40.4 
D 19.5 32.6 48.8 12.7 21.1 31.7 16.6 27.7 41.5 10.3 17.2 25.7 
3/4 9.5 15.9 23.8 7.1 11.8 17.8 8.8 14.7 22.0 6.5 10.9 16.3 
1 5.7 9.4 14.2 4.3 1:22. 10.9 52 8.7 13.1 4.1 6.9 10.3 
11⁄4 3.8 6.3 9.4 2.5 4.1 6.2 2.9 4.9 7.3 2.6 4.3 6.4 
1% 2.7 4.5 6.7 1.8 3.0 4.5 2.1 3.5 5.3 2.0 3.3 4.9 
2 1.6 2.6 3.9 1.1 1.8 2:7. 1.3 2.1 3.1 1.3 2.1 3.1 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 ounce = 29.573 mL, 1 inch = 25 mm 


TABLE L 502.72 (3) 
LENGTH (FT) PER VOLUME OF PIPING 


PEX & PE-RT CTS SDR 9 PEX-AL-PEX (DN) PE-AL-PE (DN) 
NOMINAL SIZE, | шо; 40 OZ 60 OZ 24 OZ 40 OZ 60 OZ 24 OZ 40 OZ 60 OZ 
inches (DN) 
3% (12) 37.5 62.5 93.8 40.7 67.8 101.8 40.7 67.8 101.8 
1 (16) 20.4 33.9 50.9 19.6 32.7 49.0 19.6 32.7 49.0 
3/4 (25) 10.2 17.0 25.5 7.3 12.2 18.3 7.3 12.2 18.3 
1 (32) 6.2 10.3 15.5 4.5 7.4 11.2 4.5 7.4 11.2 
Пл (40) 4.1 6.9 10.3 2.8 4.6 6.9 2.8 4.6 6.9 
1'4 (50) 3.0 4.9 7.4 1.7 2.9 4.3 1.7 2.9 4.3 
2 (63) 1.7 2.9 4.3 1.0 1.7 2.6 1.0 1.7 2.6 


For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 ounce = 29.573 mL, | inch = 25 mm 
* DN is outside diameter 


510 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


TABLE L 502.72 (4) 
LENGTH (FT) PER VOLUME OF PIPING 


! PP SDR 11 products are not typically used or rated at 180°F (82.2°C). 
? DN is outside diameter. 


L 503.2.2 Additional Requirements for Service 
Water Heating. Service water heating systems and 
equipment shall comply with Section L 503.4.1 through 
Section L 503.4.3. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.2.2] 


L 503.3 Mandatory Provisions. The mandatory provi- 
sions of Section L 503.3.1 through Section L 503.3.7 shall be 
followed. 


L 503.3.1 Load Calculations. Service water-heating 
system design loads for the purpose of sizing systems 
and equipment shall be determined in accordance with 
manufacturer's published sizing guidelines or generally 
accepted engineering standards and handbooks accept- 
able to the adopting authority (e.g., ASHRAE Handbook 
— HVAC Applications). [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.1] 


L 503.3.2 Equipment Efficiency. Water-heating 
equipment, hot-water supply boilers used solely for heat- 
ing potable water, pool heaters, and hot water storage 
tanks shall comply with the criteria listed in Table L 
503.3.2. Where multiple criteria are listed, all criteria 
shall be met. The omission of minimum performance 
requirements for certain classes of equipment does not 
preclude the use of such equipment where appropriate. 
Equipment not listed in Table L 503.3.2 has no minimum 
performance requirements. 


Exceptions: Water heaters and hot-water supply boilers 

having more than 140 gallons (530 L) of storage capac- 

ity are not required to meet the standby loss (SL) require- 
ments of Table L 503.3.2 where: 

(1) The tank surface is thermally insulated to R-12.5. 

(2) A standing pilot light is not installed. 

(3) Gas- or oil-fired storage water heaters have a flue 
damper or fan-assisted combustion. [ASHRAE 
90.1:7.4.2] 

L 503.3.3 Service Hot Water Piping Insulation. 

Insulation of hot water and return piping shall meet the 

provisions in Section L 501.2. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PP SDR 6 (DN) PP SDR 73 (DN) PP SDR 11 (DN)! 
NOMINAE სალა 24 02 40 02 60 02 24 02 40 02 60 02 24 02 40 02 60 02 
Inches (DN) 
3% (16) 28.2 46.9 70.4 23.5 39.2 58.8 NA NA NA 
1⁄2 (20) 17.7 29.6 44.3 14.7 24.4 36.6 NA NA NA 
3/4 (25) 11.2 18.7 28.0 9.5 15.8 23.6 NA NA NA 
1 (32) 6.9 11.6 17.3 25 9.5 14.2 NA NA NA 
1'/ (40) 4.4 7.3 11.0 3.6 6.1 9.1 NA NA NA 
115 (50) 2.8 4.6 6.9 2.3 3.9 5.8 NA NA NA 
2 (63) 1.8 2.9 4.4 1.5 2.4 3.7 NA NA NA 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 ounce = 29.573 mL, | inch = 25 mm 
Notes: 


L 503.3.4 Hot Water System Design. Hot water sys- 
tems shall comply with the following: 


(1) Circulating hot water systems shall be arranged so 
that the circulating pump(s) are capable of being 
turned off (automatically or manually) where the hot 
water system is not in operation. 


Exception: For healthcare facilities, long term care 
facilities, hotels, or motels, devices that automatically 
turn off the circulation pump(s) shall not be required. 


(2) Where used to maintain storage tank water temper- 
ature, circulating pump(s) shall be equipped with 
controls limiting operation to a period from the start 
of the heating cycle to a maximum of 5 minutes after 
the end of the heating cycle. 


(3) The maximum volume of water contained in hot 
water distribution lines between the water heater and 
the fixture stop or connection to showers, kitchen 
faucets, and lavatories shall be determined in accor- 
dance with Section L 502.7. 


L 503.3.5 Service Water Heating System Con- 
trols. Service water heating system controls shall com- 
ply with Section L 503.3.5(1) and Section L 503.3.5(2). 


(1) Temperature controls shall be provided that allow | 
for storage temperature adjustment from 120°F 
(49°C) or lower to a maximum temperature com- 
patible with the intended use. 


Exception: Where the manufacturer’s installation 
instructions specify a higher minimum thermostat 
setting to minimize condensation and resulting cor- 
rosion. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.4.1] 


(2) Temperature controlling means shall be provided to 
limit the maximum temperature of water delivered 
from lavatory faucets in public facility restrooms to 
110°F (43°C). [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.4.3] 


L 503.3.6 Pools. Pool heating systems shall comply 
with Section L 503.3.6(1) through Section L 503.3.6(3). 


511 


APPENDIX L 


(1) Pool heaters shall be equipped with a readily acces- 
sible ON/OFF switch to allow shutting offthe heater 
without adjusting the thermostat setting. Pool 
heaters fired by natural gas shall not have continu- 
ously burning pilot lights. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.5.1] 
Heated pools shall be equipped with a vapor retar- 
dant pool cover on or at the water surface. Pools 
heated to more than 90?F (32?C) shall have a pool 
cover with a minimum insulation value of R-12. 


Exception: Pools that are deriving over 60 percent of 

the energy for heating from site-recovered energy or 

on-site renewable energy. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.5.2] 

Time switches shall be installed on swimming pool 

heaters and pumps. 

Exceptions: 

(1) Where public health standards require 24-hour 
pump operation. 

(2) Where pumps are required to operate solar and 


waste heat recovery pool heating systems. 
[ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.5.3] 


L 503.3.7 Heat Traps. Vertical pipe risers serving stor- 
age water heaters and storage tanks not having integral 
heat traps and serving a nonrecirculating system shall 
have heat traps on both the inlet and outlet piping as close 
as practical to the storage tank. A heat trap is a means to 
counteract the natural convection of heated water in a 
vertical pipe run. The means is either of the following: 
(1) A device specifically designed for the purpose or an 
arrangement of tubing that forms a loop of 360 
degrees (6.28 rad). 

Piping that, from the point of connection to the water 
heater (inlet or outlet) includes a length of piping 
directed downward before connection to the verti- 
cal piping of the supply water or hot-water distribu- 
tion system, as applicable. [ASHRAE 90.1:7.4.6] 


(2 


МУ 


(3 


— 


(2 


МУ 


503.4 Prescriptive Path. The prescriptive path for space 
or water heating efficiency shall comply with Section L 
503.4.1 through Section L 503.4.5. 


512 


L 503.4.1 Space Heating and Service Water Heat- 
ing. The use of a gas-fired or oil-fired space heating 
boiler system, otherwise in accordance with Section L 
503.0, to provide the total space heating and service 
water heating for a building is allowed where one of the 
following conditions is met: 


(1) The single space-heating boiler, or the component 
of a modular or multiple boiler system that is heat- 
ing the service water, has a standby loss in Btu/h 
(kW) not exceeding (13.3 х рта + 400)/n, where 
(pmd) is the probable maximum demand in gallons 
per hour, determined in accordance with the proce- 
dures described in generally accepted engineering 
standards and handbooks, and (л) is the fraction of 
the year where the outdoor daily mean temperature 
exceeds 64.9?F (18.28?C). 


The standby loss is to be determined for a test 
period of 24 hours duration while maintaining a 
boiler water temperature of not less than 90?F 
(50?C) above ambient, with an ambient temperature 


between 60?F (16?C) and 90?F (32?C). For a boiler 
with a modulating burner, this test shall be con- 
ducted at the lowest input. 


(2) It is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction that the use of a single heat 
source will consume less energy than separate units. 


(3) The energy input of the combined boiler and water 
heater system is less than 150 000 British thermal units 
per hour (Btu/h) (44 kW). [ASHRAE 90.1:7.5.1] 


L 503.4.2 Service Water-Heating Equipment. | 
Service water-heating equipment used to provide the 
additional function of space heating as part of a combi- 
nation (integrated) system shall satisfy all stated require- | 
ments for the service water-heating equipment. 
[ASHRAE 90.1:7.5.2] 


L 503.4.3 Large Service Water-Heating Systems. 
New buildings with service water-heating systems with 
a total installed input capacity of 1 000 000 Btu/h (293 
kW) or greater, provided by high-capacity gas-fired serv- 
ice water-heating equipment shall meet either or both of 
the following requirements: 


(1) Wherea single unit of high-capacity gas-fired service 
water-heating equipment is installed, it shall have a 
minimum thermal efficiency (E) of 92 percent. 


(2) Multiple units of high-capacity gas-fired service 
water-heating equipment connected to the same 
service water-heating system shall have a total 
input-capacity-weighted average thermal efficiency 
(E) of at least 90 percent, and a minimum of 30 per- 
cent ofthe input of the high-capacity gas-fired serv- 
ice water-heating equipment in the service water 
heating-system shall have a thermal efficiency (£f) 
of at least 92 percent. 

High-capacity gas-fired service water-heating equip- 
ment comprises gas-fired instantaneous water heaters with 
a rated input both greater than 200 000 Btu/h (58.6 kW) 
and not less than 4000 British thermal units per hour per 
gallon [Btu/(h*gal)] (0.3097 kW/L) of stored water, and 
gas-fired storage water heaters with a rated input both 
greater than 105 000 Btu/h (30.8 kW) and less than 4000 
British thermal units per hour per gallon [Btu/(hegal)] 
(0.3097 kW/L) of stored water. 


Exceptions: 
(1) Water heaters installed in individual dwelling units. | 


(2) Individual gas water heaters with input capacity not 
greater than 100 000 Btu/h (29.3 kW). [ASHRAE 
90.1:7.5.3] 

L 503.4.4 Heat Recovery for Service Water 

Heating. Condenser heat recovery systems shall be 

installed for heating or preheating of service hot water 

provided all of the following are true: | 

(1) The facility operates 24 hours а day. 

(2) The total installed heat rejection capacity of the 
water-cooled systems exceeds 6 000 000 Btu/h 
(1758 kW) of heat rejection. 


(3) The design service water-heating load exceeds 1 000 
000 Btu/h (293 kW). [ASHRAE 90.1:6.5.6.2.1] 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


L 503.4.5 Capacity. The required heat recovery sys- 
tem shall have the capacity to provide the smaller of: 


(1) Sixty percent of the peak heat-rejection load at 
design conditions or 


(2) Preheat of the peak service hot-water draw to 85?F 
(29°C). 
Exceptions: 


(1) Facilities that employ condenser heat recovery for 
space heating with a heat recovery design exceed- 
ing 30 percent of the peak water-cooled condenser 
load at design conditions. 


(2) Facilities that provide 60 percent of their service 
water heating from onsite renewable energy or site- 
recovered energy or from other sources. [ASHRAE 
90.1:6.5.6.2.2] 


L 503.5 Submittals. The Authority Having Jurisdiction 
shall require submittal of compliance documentation and sup- 
plemental information in accordance with Section 104.3.1 of 
this code. 


L 504.0 Solar Water Heating Systems. 


L 504.1 General. The erection, installation, alteration, addi- 
tion to, use or maintenance of solar water heating systems 
shall be in accordance with this section and the Uniform Solar 
Energy and Hydronics Code. 


L 504.2 Annual Inspection and Maintenance. Solar 
energy systems that utilize a heat transfer fluid shall annually 
be inspected unless inspections are required on a more fre- 
quent basis by the solar energy system manufacturer. 


L 505.0 Hard Water. 


L 505.1 Softening and Treatment. Where water has a 
hardness equal to or exceeding 10 gr/gal (171 mg/L) meas- 
ured as total calcium carbonate equivalents, the water supply 
line to water heating equipment and the circuit of boilers shall 
be softened or treated to prevent accumulation of limescale 
and consequent reduction in energy efficiency. 


L 506.0 Drain Water Heat Exchangers. 


L 506.1 General. Drain water heat exchangers shall comply 
with IAPMO PS 92. The heat exchanger shall be accessible. 


L 507.0 Heat Recovery from Steam Boiler Blowdown. 
L 507.1 General. Where heat recovery can be used benefi- 
cially to heat boiler makeup water or for other purposes, boiler 
blowdown from steam boilers exceeding 15 psi (103 kPa) and 
3.4 E+06 Btu/h (996 kW) shall be directed to a heat recovery 
system that reduces the temperature of the blowdown discharge 
to below 140°F (60°C) without using tempering water. 


L 601.0 Installer Qualifications. 


L 601.1 Scope. The provisions of this section address min- 
imum qualifications of installers of plumbing and mechanical 
systems covered within the scope of this appendix. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX L 


L 602.0 Qualifications. 


L 602.1 General. Where permits are required, the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to require con- 
tractors, installers, or service technicians to demonstrate 
competency. Where determined by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, the contractor, installer, or service technician 
shall be licensed to perform such work. 


513 


APPENDIX L 


TABLE L 503.3.2 


PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER-HEATING EQUIPMENT MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS 
[ASHRAE 90.1: TABLE 7.8] 


0.6002 — (0.0011 x №) 
High DP: UEF - 
0.6597 — (0.0009 x И) 


EQUIPMENT TYPE age sai ванае нагон PERFORMANCE REQUIRED' TEST PROCEDURE?? 
Electric table-top water <12 kw «4000 (Btu/h)/gal i ы р NI E T Appendix E of 
heaters = >20 gal and «120 gal | °% 99106 19). "01 ^. appii- 10 CFR 430 

cations, see footnote (7). 
For applications outside U.S., Р 
«4000 (Btu/h)/gal Ex t otnote (8). For U.S Appendix E of 
E z Р S. 
220 gal and <55 gal applications, see footnote (7). EPI TD 
Electric st t Sey 
CUTE SOTA SE WALEN For applications outside U.S., = 
heaters «4000 (Btu/h)/gal რა. > otnote (8). For U.S Appendix E of 
>55 gal and <120 gal ED : v 10 CFR 430 
applications, see footnote (7). 
>12 kW? «4000 (Btu/h)/gal SL x 0.3 + 27/V m%/h 10 CFR 431.106 
For applications outside U.S., : 
<12 kW =4000 (Btu/h)/gal see footnote (8). For U.S. Appendix E of 
<2 gal თს 10 CFR 430 
applications, see footnote (7). 
Very Small DP: UEF = 0.80 
> 
>12 kW and რ... Low DP: UEF = 0.80 
Electric instantaneous water «58.6 kW? СЕ Medium DP: UEF = 0.80 
heaters E High DP: UEF - 0.80 
Appendix E of 
74000 (Btu/h)/gal | 19 CER 430 
No requirement 
<10 gal 
<58.6 kW? 
24000 (Btu/h)/gal . 
>10 gal No requirement 
4000 (Btu/h)/gal poc აა M Appendix E of 
т É Р S. 
=20 gal and <55 gal applications, see footnote (7). TO CPR 430 
<75 000 Btu/h 
<4000 (Btu/h)/gal жо. е Appendix Е of 
2 ; .S. 
>55 gal and S TOU gal applications, see footnote (7). HORER quU 
Gas storage water heaters Very Small DP: UEF = 
0.2674 — (0.0009 x V) 
Low DP: UEF = 
>75 000 Btu/h and кз, gal 0.5362 — (0.0012 x У) Appendix E of 
«105 000 Btu/h* puso Medium DP: UEF = 10 CFR 430 


7105 000 Btu/h^ 6 


«4000 (Btu/h)/gal 


8096 E; 
SL < (0/800 + 110VV), Btu/h 


10 CFR 431.106 


514 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TABLE L 503.3.2 
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER-HEATING EQUIPMENT MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS (continued) 
[ASHRAE 90.1: TABLE 7.8] 


APPENDIX L 


SIZE CATEGORY SUBCATEGORY OR 
EQUIPMENT TYPE (INPUT) RATING CONDITION PERFORMANCE REQUIRED! TEST PROCEDURE?? 
>50 000 Btu/h апа | 24000 (Btu/h)/gal <2 ა... ს... . Appendix E of 
«200 000 Btu/h gal э. арр 10 СЕВ 430 
cations, see footnote (7). 
Gas instantaneous water 
heaters > < 
2200 000 Btu/h >4000 S 10 80% E; 
>4000 (Btu/h)/gal >10 80% E Це 
6 |= gal 2 oft 
200 009 Btu/h gal SL < (Q/800 + NV), Btu/h 


For applications outside U.S., 


Hot-water supply boilers, oil 


«12 500 000 Btu/h 


>10 gal 


<105 000 Btu/h 54000 БЕА see footnote (8). For U.S. appli- Appendix E óf 
<50 gal : 10 CFR 430 
cations, see footnote (7). 
Very Small DP: UEF = 
0.2932 — (0.0015 x №) 
Low DP: UEF = 
i < 
On stoties Water healers . iis 000 Biki о. d ub "E 0.5596 — (0.0018 x Р) Appendix E of 
«140 000 Btu/h? <180°F 8 Medium DP: UEF = 10 CFR 430 
> 0.6194 — (0.0016 x №) 
High DP: UEF - 
0.6740 — (0.0013 x №) 
80% E; 
7140 000 Btu/h «4000 (Btu/hy/gal SL < (Q/800 + 11017), Btu/h 10 CFR 431.106 
Appendix E of 
24000 (Btu/h)/gal «2 80 % E; 10 CFR 430 
оова gal EF 20.59 - 0.0005 x V as it appeared as of 
1/1/2014 
Oil instantaneous water 
heaters 
»210000Ba/p | 74000 (Btwbygal 80% E, 
«10 gal 
10 CFR 431.106 
74000 (Btu/h)/gal 78% E, _ 
rene PUR >10 gal SL < (0800 + 1107), Btu/h 
Hot-water supply boilers, >300 000 Btu/h and 24000 (Btu/h)/gal 80% E 
gas and oil? «12 500 000 Btu/h «10 gal шы; 
Hot-water supply boilers, E о >4000 (Btu/h)/gal 80% E, — 
gas® BOK >10 gal SL < (0800 + 110V), Btu/h 10 CFR 431.106 
>300 000 Btu/h and >4000 (Btu/h)/gal 18% E, 


SL < (0/800 + 110VV), Btu/h 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


515 


APPENDIX L 


TABLE L 503.3.2 
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS FOR WATER-HEATING EQUIPMENT MINIMUM EFFICIENCY REQUIREMENTS (continued) 
[ASHRAE 90.1: TABLE 7.8] 


SIZE CATEGORY SUBCATEGORY OR 1 2,3 
EQUIPMENT TYPE (INPUT) RATING CONDITION PERFORMANCE REQUIRED TEST PROCEDURE 
82% Е; for commercial pool 
heaters and for applications out- | 
Pool heaters, gas All = side U.S. dE : 
For U.S. applications, see foot- 
note (7). 
50?F db 44.2?F wb Appendix P of 
Heat pump pool heaters All Outdoor air 80.0°F 4.0 COP 10 CFR 430 
entering water 
Unfired storage tanks All — R-12.5 (none) 


For SI units: 1 gallon = 3.785 L, 1000 British thermal units per hour = 0.293 kW, °C = (°F-32)/1.8 
Notes: 
! Thermal efficiency (Ef) is a minimum requirement, while standby loss (SL) is a maximum requirement. In the SL equation, V is the rated volume in gallons 
and Q is the nameplate input rate in Btu/h (kW). Vm is the measured volume in the tank in gallons. Standby loss for electric water heaters is in terms of %/h 
and denoted by the term "S," and standby loss for gas and oil water heaters is in terms of Btu/h and denoted by the term "SL." Draw pattern (DP) refers to 
the water draw profile in the Uniform Energy Factor (UEF) test. UEF and Energy Factor (EF) are minimum requirements. In the UEF standard equations, 
V, refers to the rated volume in gallons. 
ASHRAE 90.1 contains a complete specification, including the year version, of the referenced test procedure. 
Electric instantaneous water heaters with input capacity >40 946 Btu/h (12 kW) and x200 000 Btu/h (58.6 kW) must comply with the requirements for the 
200 000 Btu/h (58.6 kW) if the water heater either: 
(a) has a storage volume 2 gallons (7.6 L); 
(b) is designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180?F (82?C); or 
(c) uses three phase power. 
Gas storage water heaters with input capacity >75 000 Btu/h (22 kW) and x105 000 Btu/h (30.8 kW) must comply with the requirements for the >105 000 
Btu/h (30.8 kW) if the water heater either: 
(a) has a storage volume 7120 gallons (454 L); 
(b) is designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180?F (82.2?C); or 
(c) uses three-phase power 
Oil storage water heaters with input capacity 7105 000 Btu/h (30.8 kW) and <140 000 Btu/h (41.0 kW) must comply with the requirements for the >140 000 
Btu/h (41.0 kW) if the water heater either 
(a) has a storage volume 7120 gallons (454 L); 
(b) is designed to provide outlet hot water at temperatures greater than 180?F (82.2?C); or 
(c) uses three-phase power 

Refer to Section L 503.4.3 for additional requirements for gas storage and instantaneous water heaters and gas hot-water supply boilers. 

Water heaters or gas pool heaters in this category or subcategory are regulated as consumer products by the USDOE as defined in 10 CFR 430. 

Where this standard is being applied to a building outside the U.S. and Canada and water heaters in this subcategory are being installed in that building, those 
water heaters shall meet the local efficiency requirements. If there are no local efficiency standards for residential water heaters, consideration should be given 
to using the USDOE efficiency requirements shown in Appendix F, Table F-2 of ASHRAE 90.1. 


v N 


on თ 


516 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX M - PEAK WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 


Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR ЮМ |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 1AC АС | SS 55/СС 1 1R 2 3З 4 5 6 


Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended X 
sections listed below) 
Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 
M 101.1 X 
Table M 102.1 X 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: Y 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal s adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 


Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 517 


518 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX M 
PEAK WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


M 101.0 General. 


M 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides an alterna- 
tive method for estimating the demand load for the building 
water supply and principal branches for single- and multi- 
family dwellings with water-conserving plumbing fixtures, 
fixture fittings, and appliances. 


M 102.0 Demand Load. 


M 102.1 Water-Conserving Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures, 
fixture fittings, and appliances shall not exceed the design 
flow rate in Table M 102.1. 


TABLE M 102.1 
DESIGN FLOW RATE FOR WATER-CONSERVING PLUMBING 
FIXTURES AND APPLIANCES IN RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCIES 


MAXIMUM DESIGN 
FIXTURE AND APPLIANCE FLOW RATE 

(gallons per minute) 
Bar Sink 1.5 
Bathtub 5.5 
Bidet 2.0 
Clothes Washer 3.5 
Combination Bath/Shower 5.5 
Dishwasher 1.3 
Kitchen Faucet 1.8 
Laundry Faucet (with aerator) 2.0 
Lavatory Faucet 1.2 
Shower, per head 1.8 
Water Closet, 1.28 GPF Gravity Tank 3.0 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


M 102.2 Water Demand Calculator. The estimated design 
flow rate for the building supply and principal branches and 
risers shall be determined by the IAPMO Water Demand 
Calculator available for download at http://www.iapmo.org/ 
WEStand/Pages/WaterDemandCalculator.aspx 

M 102.3 Meter and Building Supply. To determine the 
design flow rate for the water meter and building supply, 
enter the total number of indoor plumbing fixtures and appli- 
ances for the building in Column [B] of the Water Demand 
Calculator and run Calculator. See Table M 102.3 for an 
example. 

M 102.4 Fixture Branches and Fixture Supplies. To 
determine the design flow rate for fixture branches and risers, 
enter the total number of plumbing fixtures and appliances 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


for the fixture branch or riser in Column [B] of the Water 
Demand Calculator and run Calculator. The flow rate for one 
fixture branch and one fixture supply shall be the design flow 
rate of the fixture according to Table M 102.1. 


M 102.5 Continuous Supply Demand. Continuous supply 
demands in gallons per minute (gpm) for lawn sprinklers, air 
conditioners, hose bibbs, etc., shall be added to the total esti- 
mated demand for the building supply as determined by Sec- 
tion M 102.3. Where there is more than one hose bibb installed 
on the plumbing system, the demand for only one hose bibb 
shall be added to the total estimated demand for the building 
supply. Where a hose bibb is installed on a fixture branch, the 
demand of the hose bibb shall be added to the design flow rate 
for the fixture branch as determined by Section M 102.4. 


M 102.6 Other Fixtures. Fixtures not included in Table M 
102.1 shall be added in Rows 12 through 14 in the Water 
Demand Calculator as Other Fixture. The probability of use 
and flow rate for Other Fixtures shall be added by selecting 
the comparable probability of use and flow rate from Columns 
[C] and [E]. 

M 102.7 Size of Water Piping per Appendix A. Except 
as provided in Section M 102.0 for estimating the demand 
load for single- and multi-family dwellings, the size of each 
water piping system shall be determined in accordance with 
the procedure set forth in Appendix A. After determining the 
permissible friction loss per 100 feet (30 480 mm) of pipe in 
accordance with Section A 104.0 and the demand flow in 
accordance with the Water Demand Calculator, the diameter 
of the building supply pipe, branches and risers shall be 
obtained from Chart A 105.1(1) through Chart A 105.1(7), 
whichever is applicable, in accordance with Section A 105.0 
and Section A 106.0. Velocities shall be in accordance with 
Section A 107.0. Appendix I (IS 31), Figure 3 and Figure 4 
shall be permitted when sizing PEX systems. 


M 102.7.1 Minimum Fixture Branch Size. The min- 
imum fixture branch size shall be !/ inch (15 mm) in 
diameter. 


519 


APPENDIX M 


TABLE M 102.3 
WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR EXAMPLE 


[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] 
FIXTURE "U'IPIXTURES ^ | ОРИЗЕ(СЫ FLOWRATE (GPM) | FIXTURE FLOW RATE (GPM) 
1 | Bar Sink 0 2.0 1.5 1.5 
2 | Bathtub 0 1.0 3:5 5.5 
3  Bidet 0 1.0 2.0 2.0 
4 |Clothes Washer 1 55) 3.5 35 
5 | Combination Bath/Shower 1 55 5:5 Si) 
6 Dishwasher 1 0.5 1.3 1.3 
7 | Kitchen Faucet 1 2.0 2.2 22 
8 |Laundry Faucet 0 2.0 2.0 2.0 
9 | Lavatory Faucet 1 2.0 1.5 1.5 
10 | Shower, per head 0 4.5 2.0 2.0 
11 | Water Closet, 1.28 GPF Gravity Tank 1 1.0 3.0 3.0 
12 | Other Fixture 1 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
13 | Other Fixture 2 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
14 | Other Fixture 3 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
Total Number of Fixtures 6 RESET RUN WATER DEMAND 
99th Percentile Demand Flow = 8.5 GPM CALCULATOR 


For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.66 L/s, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 


M 102.8 Examples Illustrating Use of Water Demand Calculator with Appendix A. 


Example 1: Indoor Water Use Only — Use the information given below to find the pipe size for the building supply to a res- 
idential building with six indoor fixtures as shown in Figure 1 [Pipe Section 4]. 


Given Information: 


Type of construction: Residential, one-bathroom 


Friction loss per 100 ft (30 480 mm): 


15 psi (103 kPa) 


Type of pipe material: L-copper 


Maximum velocity: 


10 ft/s (3.05 m/s) 


1 combination bath/shower 


Fixture number/type: 1 dishwasher 


1 kitchen faucet 
1 WC 


1 lavatory faucet 
1 clothes washer 


ქ 
“ს TUB/ 
SHOWER 
LAVATORY 


DISHWASHER 


WATER 
KITCHEN 
CLOSET SINK 
CLOTHES 
WASHER 
WATER 
HEATER 
4 
FROM 
METER 
FIGURE 1 


RESIDENTIAL BUILDING WITH SIX INDOOR FIXTURES 


520 


Solution: Step 1 of 2 — Find Demand Load for the Build- 
ing Supply. 

The Water Demand Calculator [WDC] in Figure 2 is used to 
determine the demand load expected from indoor water use. 
The WDC has white-shaded cells and light gray-shaded cells. 
The values in the light gray cells are derived from a national 
survey of indoor water use at homes with efficient fixtures 
and cannot be changed. 


The white-shaded cells accept input from the designer. 
For instance, fixture counts from the given information are 
entered in Column [B]; the corresponding recommended fix- 
ture flow rates are already provided in Column [D]. The flow 
rates in Column [D] may be reduced only if the manufacturer 
specifies a lower flow rate for the fixture. Column [E] estab- 
lishes the upper limits for the flow rates entered into Column 
[D]. Clicking the Run Water Demand Calculator button gives 
8.5 gpm (0.54 L/s) as the estimated indoor water demand for 
the whole building. This result appears in the dark gray box 
of the WDC in Figure 2. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX M 


[A] [B] [C] [0] [Е] 
FIXTURE CU'FIXTURES ^ | OF USE(%) | FLOWRATE(GPM) | ` TURE FLOW RATE (GPM) · 
] |BarSink 0 2.0 1.5 1.5 
2 |Bathtub 0 1.0 5:5 5.5) 
3 | Bidet 0 1.0 2.0 2.0 
4 | Clothes Washer 1 553 3.5 3.5 
5 | Combination Bath/Shower 1 553 5.5 55) 
6 Dishwasher 1 0.5 1.3 1.3 
7 | Kitchen Faucet 1 2.0 2.2 222 
8 | Laundry Faucet 0 2.0 2.0 2.0 
9 | Lavatory Faucet 1 2.0 1.5 1.5 
10 | Shower, per head 0 4.5 2.0 2.0 
11 | Water Closet, 1.28 GPF Gravity Tank 1 1.0 3.0 3.0 
12 | Other Fixture 1 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
13 | Other Fixture 2 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
14 | Other Fixture 3 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
Total Number of Fixtures 6 БЕЗЕТ RUN WATER DEMAND 
99th Percentile Demand Flow — 8.5 GPM CALCULATOR 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.66 L/s, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 
FIGURE 2 


WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR FOR INDOOR USE AT HOME WITH SIX EFFICIENT FIXTURES (EXAMPLE 1) 


Solution: Step 2 of 2 — Determine the Pipe Size of the 
Building Supply. 

Chart A 105.1(1) for copper piping systems (from Appendix 
A of the UPC, shown in Figure 3) is used to determine the 
pipe size, based on given friction loss, given maximum allow- 
able pipe velocity, given pipe material and the demand load 
computed in Step 1. In Figure 3, the intersection of the given 
friction loss (15 psi) (103 kPa) and the maximum allowable 
pipe velocity (10 ft/s) (3.05 m/s) is labeled point A. The ver- 
tical line that descends from point A to the base of the chart 


intersects four nominal sizes for L-copper pipe. These inter- 
section points are labeled B, C, D, E and correspond to pipe 
sizes of 1 inch (25 mm), ?/ inch (20 mm), !^ inch (15 mm) 
and 3/s inch (10 mm), respectively. A horizontal line from 
points B, C, D, E to the right-hand side of the chart gives max- 
imum flow rates of 24 gpm (1.5 L/s), 12 gpm (0.757 L/s), 4.5 
gpm (0.28 L/s), and 2.3 gpm (0.145 L/s), respectively. These 
results are summarized in Table 1 which shows that a 4 inch 
(20 mm) type L copper line is the minimum size that can con- 
vey the peak water demand of 8.5 gpm (0.54 L/s). 


TABLE 1 


PIPE SIZE OPTIONS FOR BUILDING SUPPLY 


POINT IN FIGURE 3 ... .- а OK FOR BUILDING SUPPLY* 
E 3% 2.3 Мо 
р 1% 4.5 Мо 
C 3/4 12 Үеѕ 
В 1 24 Yes 


For SI units: 1 inch = 25 mm, 1 gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s 


* For Building in Examples 1, 2, 3, апа 4. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


521 


APPENDIX M 


CHART A 105.1(1) 


0.1 


Example 2: Indoor and Outdoor Water Use — Find the pipe 
size for the building supply [Figure 1, Pipe Section 4] if the 
building in Example 1 adds two outdoor fixtures (hose bibb, 


FRICTION LOSS IN HEAD (pounds-force per square inch) PER 100-FOOT LENGTH 


FIGURE 3 


CHART A 105.1(1) FOR FINDING PIPE SIZE 
For SI units: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, | gallon per minute = 0.06 L/s, 1 pound-force per square inch = 6.8947 kPa 


each with a fixture flow of 2.0 gpm) (0.13 L/s). 


522 


ing Supply. 


== 10 000 
Copper Tubing AL Е rt Юза а E 8000 
Smooth Pipe | | 
TypeM ---- | | som 
Type L | | 
Type K MSN 4000 
4 m с A - 3000 
4 > 2000 
e 
хе 
os” 
Cs 
— t- ““+“4ჰჟ–ღ>ფ=>აქე аб ар а - Ner 1000 
VS $ ს 800 
—— — — AN e |_| 600 
к X-H 2 500 
; э. | 400 
5 о, { > L 300 
4 NO 
2. | M 
A | == 200 
О, | | 
Ф са ი 
რ) Q 
| | 100 
x | Алё | = 
\ 4 60 
О а 50 
P | 
ღ N z^ 40 
А IN | Le 
| | ! >» 30 
„Др: — 
\ | 74 2 2 j 20 
LL «I | 
2 Ic 221 | p 
a 2 ч 
P ven 10 
р Л à 
> TA ._ 
2 | e zr 
| 
Z AXA | > E 4244 * 
= on = | | => XA 5 
p! 
- абай = ee D 2 > Г” 4 
^ ^ a 2 Sat 
^ “LC. й "ИТ, d | 3 
at + 71 | 
» tA = C 
P 2 2 adi 2 
2 ТТ p a УМ = 
21 Ры ^ | 
T d > +“ | 
2 DTN 221 | | 
, 
0.2 04 0506 08 1 3 4 56 8 10 20 30 40 5060 80 100 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


Solution: Step 1 of 2 — Find Demand Load for the Build- 


The WDC has been developed exclusively for peak indoor 
water use which can be viewed as a high-frequency short dura- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tion process. Because fixtures for outdoor water use may oper- 
ate continuously for very long periods, they are not included in 
the WDC. To account for water use from one or more outdoor 
fixtures, add the demand of the single outdoor fixture with the 
highest flowrate to the calculated demand for indoor water use. 
With two hose bibbs, the demand of only one hose bibb is 
included. Hence, in this example, the total demand for the whole 
house is 8.5 gpm (0.54 L/s) + 2.0 gpm (0.13 L/s) = 10.5 ерт 
(0.662 L/s). 


Solution: Step 2 of 2 — Determine the Pipe Size of the 
Building Supply. 

Table 1 shows that at 10.5 gpm (0.662 L/s) the building sup- 
ply shall be 3/4 inch (20 mm) in diameter. 


Example 3: Indoor, Outdoor and Other Fixture Water Use 
— Find the pipe size for the water supply [Figure 1, Pipe Section 
4] if the building in Example 2 adds a kitchen pot filler and a 
dog bath each with a faucet flow rate of 5.5 ерт (0.35 L/s). 
Solution: Step 1 of 2 — Find Demand Load for the Build- 
ing Supply. 

The kitchen pot filler and dog bath are not listed in Column 
[A] of the WDC. To accommodate cases such as this, the 
WDC provides up to three additional rows for “Other Fix- 
tures". Enter the kitchen pot filler and dog bath in Column 
[A] of the WDC and enter the fixture count for each in Col- 
umn [B]. Find an indoor fixture that has a similar probability 
of use in Column [C] and add that to the column. Finally, 
enter the flow rate of the kitchen pot filler and dog bath in 
Column [D]. The estimated indoor water demand for the 
whole building is 11 gpm, as shown in the WDC in Figure 4. 


APPENDIX M 


As illustrated in Example 2, the hose bibb will increase the 
total demand for the whole house to 13 gpm (0.820 L/s). 


Note that a reset button is provided to clear any numbers 
in Column [B] from a previous calculation. 


Solution: Step 2 of 2 — Determine the Pipe Size of the 
Building Supply. 

Table 1 shows that at 13 gpm (0.820 L/s) the building sup- 
ply shall be linch (25 mm) in diameter. 


Example 4: Sizing Branches and Risers — For individual hot 
and cold branches, repeat Steps 1 and 2. For example, for the 
hot water branch at the water heater [Figure 1, Pipe Section 3], 
enter all the fixtures and appliances that use hot water into the 
Water Demand Calculator (toilets will be excluded) as seen 
in Figure 5. Use the calculated demand load to find the pipe 
size in Step 2. Table 1 shows that at 7.7 (0.49 L/s) gpm, the hot 
water branch shall be ?/ inch (20 mm) in diameter. 


For each additional hot and cold branch [Figure 1, Pipe 
Sections 1 and 2], enter the number of fixtures and appliances 
served by that branch into the WDC and use that demand in 
Step 2 to determine the branch size. If the branch serves a 
hose bibb, add the demand of the hose bibb to the calculated 
demand flow for the branch. As discussed in Example 2, the 
hose bibb is not to be entered into WDC, since the Calcula- 
tor is for indoor uses only. 


When there is only one fixture or appliance served by a 
fixture branch, the demand flow shall not exceed the fixture 
flow rate in Column [E] of the Water Demand Calculator. 
The fixture flow rate would be used in Step 2 to determine 
the size of the fixture branch and supply. 


[A] [B] IC] [D] [E] 
FIXTURE ENTER NUMBER OF | PROBABILITY ENTER FIXTURE MAXIMUM RECOMMENDED FIX- 
FIXTURES OF USE (%) FLOW RATE (GPM) TURE FLOW RATE (GPM) 
] |BarSink 0 2.0 1.5 i3 
2 |Bathtub 0 1.0 5.5 9.5) 
3  Bidet 0 1.0 2.0 2.0 
4 Clothes Washer 1 5.5) 3.5 3.5 
5 | Combination Bath/Shower 1 505) 5.5 5.5) 
6 Dishwasher 1 0.5 1.3 1.3 
7 | Kitchen Faucet 1 2.0 2.2 22 
8 | Laundry Faucet 0 2.0 2.0 2.0 
9 | Lavatory Faucet 1 2.0 1.5 1.5 
10 | Shower, per head 0 4.5 2.0 2.0 
11 | Water Closet, 1.28 GPF Gravity Tank 1 1.0 3.0 3.0 
12 | Pot Filler 1 2.0 5:5 6.0 
13 | Dog Bath 1 1.0 5.5 6.0 
14 | Other Fixture 3 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
Total Number of Fixtures 8 RUN WATER DEMAND 
RESET 
99th Percentile Demand Flow = 11.0 GPM CALCULATOR 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.66 L/s, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 
FIGURE 4 


WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR TO ACCOMMODATE OTHER FIXTURES (EXAMPLE 3) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


523 


APPENDIX M 


[A] [B] [C] [D] [E] 
FIXTURE CU'PIXTURES ^ | OF USE(%) | FLOWRATE(GPM) | ` TURE FLOWRATE (GPM) 
] |BarSink 0 2.0 1.5 1.5 
2 |Bathtub 0 1.0 3:5 DES 
3  Bidet 0 1.0 2.0 2.0 
4 Clothes Washer 1 55 3.5 3.5 
5 |Combination Bath/Shower 1 55 5.5 55 
6 | Dishwasher 1 0.5 1.3 1.3 
7 | Kitchen Faucet 1 2.0 2.2 222 
8 | Laundry Faucet 0 2.0 2.0 2.0 
9 | Lavatory Faucet 1 2.0 1.5 1.5 
10 | Shower, per head 0 4.5 2.0 2.0 
11 | Water Closet, 1.28 GPF Gravity Tank 0 1.0 3.0 3.0 
12 | Other Fixture 1 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
13 | Other Fixture 2 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
14 | Other Fixture 3 0 0.0 0.0 6.0 
Total Number of Fixtures 5 RESET RUN WATER DEMAND 
99th Percentile Demand Flow = 7.7 GPM CALCULATOR 
For SI units: 1 gallon per minute = 0.66 L/s, 1 gallon = 3.785 L 
FIGURE 5 


524 


WATER DEMAND CALCULATOR FOR THE HOT WATER BRANCH (EXAMPLE 4) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX N - IMPACT OF WATER TEMPERATURE ON THE POTENTIAL FOR SCALDING AND LEGIONELLA GROWTH 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 5 16 
Adopt Entire Chapter X XXX 1 XI XI X XIX 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 525 


526 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX N 


IMPACT OF WATER TEMPERATURE ON THE POTENTIAL FOR SCALDING 
AND LEGIONELLA GROWTH 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


N 101.0 General. 


N 101.1 Applicability. This appendix provides guidelines 
on the impact of water temperature in minimizing both scald- 
ing and Legionella growth potential associated with occupi- 
able commercial, institutional, multi-unit residential, and 
industrial building plumbing systems. 


This appendix shall not include single-family residential 
buildings. This appendix shall not be considered a risk man- 
agement guidance document for scalding or Legionella. 
Where required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, 
Legionella risk management shall be in accordance with 
ASHRAE 188 and ASHRAE Guideline 12. 

| Note: There are additional factors associated with the poten- 
tial for scalding and Legionella growth other than tempera- 
ture. 

For scalding potential, other factors include, but are not 
limited to, user age, health, body part, length of contact time, 
and water source. 

For Legionella growth potential other factors include, but 
are not limited to, water source and plumbing system: size, 
design, circulation rate, water age, disinfectant residual, pip- 
ing material and component complexity. 


N 102.0 Definitions. 
N 102.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 
Biofilm. Microorganisms and the slime they secrete that 
grow on any continually moist surface. 
Cold Water. Water at a temperature less than 77°F (25°C). 
Control. The management of the operating conditions to main- 
tain compliance with established criteria. {ASHRAE 188:3} 
Disinfecting Hot Water. Water at a temperature not less 
than 160?F (71?C). 
Disinfection. The process of killing or inactivating microor- 
ganism. [ASHRAE 188:3] 
Halogenation. A chemical reaction that involves the addi- 
tion of one or more halogens, including, but not limited to, 
chlorine, bromine, or iodine, commonly used to disinfect 
water systems. 
Hazard. See Risk. 
Hot Water. Water at a temperature not less than 130?F 
(54°C) and less than 140°F (60°C). 

|Legionella Growth Potential. The likelihood that 
Legionella bacteria will reproduce. 
Monitor. Observing and checking the progress or quality of 
(something) or measuring the physical and chemical charac- 
teristics of control measures. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Risk. The potential for harm to humans resulting from expo- 
sure to Legionella. [ASHRAE 188:3]. 


Scald Potential. The likelihood of burning the skin. 
Tempered Hot Water. Water at a temperature not less than 
120°F (49°C) and less than 130°F (54?C). 

Tepid Cold Water. Water at a temperature not less than | 
77°F (25°C) and less than 85°F (29°C). 

Tepid Water. Water at a temperature not less than 85°F | 
(29°C) and less than 110°F (43°C). 

Test. The measurement of the physical, chemical, or micro- 
bial characteristics or quality of water. 

Very Hot Water. Water at a temperature not less than 140°F 
(60°C) and less than 160°F (71°C). 

Warm Water. Water at a temperature not less than 110°F | 
(43°C) and less than 120°F (49°C). 

Water Management Plan. A plan to reduce the risk of 
Legionella growth and spread. 


N 103.0 Building Water System Design Documenta- 
tion. 


N 103.1 Design Documentation. Construction docu- | 
ments shall be required for new construction, renovation, 
refurbishment, replacement, or repurposing of an occupiable 
building water system, including a water management plan, | 
and shall be submitted to the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


N 103.2 Onsite Documentation. Documentation shall be 
maintained onsite and shall be readily accessible to the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


N 104.0 Potential Exposure. 


N 104.1 Legionella Growth Potential. The Authority 
Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to require docu- 
mentation to address Legionella growth potential, where 
water temperatures in a water distribution system are within 
ranges shown in Figure N 104.1 that pose a Legionella growth | 
potential. 


N 104.2 Scald Potential. Where the water distribution sys- 
tem’s water temperature(s) range poses a scald potential in 
accordance with Table N 104.2, protection shall be provided | 
in accordance with Chapter 4. 


N 105.0 Disinfection. 


N 105.1 Disinfection Documentation. Where required 
by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, documentation for dis- 
infection of all building water systems shall be provided by 
the registered design professional in the construction docu- 
ments. 


527 


APPENDIX N 


N 105.1.1 Copper-Silver lonization. Copper-silver 
ionization methods and procedures, shall include the fol- 
lowing documentation: 

(1) Copper and silver ionization concentrations. 


(2) Methods and documentation for monitoring ion lev- 
els. 


(3) Electrode cleaning cycles and methods. 


N 105.1.2 Ultraviolet Light. Ultraviolet light methods 
shall include the following documentation: 


(1) Locations of ultraviolet light units. 


(2) Cleaning cycles and methods of the quartz sleeves 
and housing. 


N 105.2 Chemical Disinfection. Chemical biocide treat- 
ment shall be permitted to be used in accordance with the fol- 
lowing: 

(1) Oxidizing biocides in accordance with manufacturer's 
guidelines, or as required by the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 

(2) Non-oxidizing biocides in accordance with manufac- 

turer's guidelines. 

(3) Alternating the use of different types of biocides, dose, 

and frequency is recommended. 


These treatment methods can be used for continuous, 
online disinfection or shock treatment online or offline. 


(4) 
(5) 


Biocides intended for potable water applications shall 
listed in accordance with NSF/ANSI/CAN 60 and 


approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Legionella growth 
77 - 85°F (25 - 30°C) 


Ideal growth range 


85 - 110°F (30 - 43°C) 


Legionella growth range 68 – 120°F (20 – 49°C) 


68'F 77L 85°F 


20°C 25°C 
„ __ 


30°C 


Legionella can survive but are 
dormant below 68°F (20°C) 


Slow growth range 
68 - 77°F (20 - 25°C) 


For SI units: °C = (?F-32)/1.8 


N 105.3 Non-Chemical Treatment. Non-chemical treat- 
ment devices shall be permitted to be used in accordance with 
manufacturer's guidelines. 
N 105.3.1 Thermal Shock. Thermal treatment using 
heat shock at 158?F (70?C) for 30 minutes shall be per- 
mitted in accordance with applicable guidelines. 
N 105.4 Frequency of Cleaning and Disinfection. 
Where a water management plan is implemented, the fre- 
quency of cleaning and disinfection logs shall be readily 
accessible to the water management team and the Authority 
Having Jurisdiction. 


N 201.0 Supply System Legionella Test Levels. 


N 201.1 General. The minimum remediation action for water 
supply systems shall be in accordance with Table N 201.1. 


N 202.0 Emergency Disinfection Procedure. 


N 202.1 General. An emergency disinfection procedure 
shall be provided in accordance with Table N 201.1. 


Legionella growth slows and 
some die 110 — 130°F (43 — 54°С) 


Rapid Legionella death 
above 160°F (71°C) 


=a 


110°F 120°F 130°F 140°F 150'F 160'F 180°F 


43°C 49°C 54°C 60°C 65°C 70°C 82°C 


Legionella die and do not grow at 
130 - 160°F (54 - 71°C)* 


* The following temperatures have been shown 
to kill Legionella in laboratory conditions: 
* 131°F (55°C), 5 - 6 hours 
* 140°F (60°C), 32 minutes 
* 151'F (66°C), 2 minutes 


* Temperature ranges reported are experimentally determined in a laboratory setting in the absence of a realistic microbial community. Legionella can survive 
for longer periods of time at temperatures higher and lower than the growth temperature ranges indicated due to changes in their metabolic state and/or pro- 
tection from thermal disinfection within biofilm or amoeba host organisms. 


FIGURE N 104.1 
WATER TEMPERATURE RANGES AND LEGIONELLA GROWTH POTENTIAL* 


528 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX N 


TABLE N 104.2 
WATER TEMPERATURE RANGES AND SCALD POTENTIAL 


WATER 
DESCRIPTION 


Cold «TI None 

Tepid Cold >77 and «85 None 

Tepid None 

285 and «110 Hyperthermia is possible after long exposure in a 
bathtub or whirlpool tub. 

Warm Minimal 

=110 and <120 At 111?F, greater than 220 minutes for second-degree burn. 
Tempered Hot Low 

At 120*F, greater than 5 minutes for second-degree burn, 
2120 and «130 and 10 minutes to third-degree burn; 

At 124?F, 2 minutes for second-degree burn, 
and 4 minutes, 10 seconds for third-degree burn. 
Hot Moderate to High 
2130 and «140 At 130?F, 18 seconds for second-degree burn, 
and 30 seconds for third-degree burn. 

Very Hot High 

At 140?F, 3 seconds for second-degree burn, 
and 5 seconds for third-degree burn; 

2140 and «160 At 150?F, instant for second-degree burn, 

and less than 2 seconds for third-degree burn; 

At 158?F, instant for second-degree burn, 
and less than 1 second for third-degree burn. 


TEMPERATURE (*F) SCALD POTENTIAL* 


Disinfecting Hot 2160 Immediate 


For SI units: °C = (?F-32)/1.8 
* The infant, elderly, and infirmed have a higher potential for scalding at temperatures lower than listed. 


TABLE N 201.1 
LEGIONELLA REMEDIATION ACTIONS DOMESTIC WATER SYSTEMS 


PERCENTAGE OF 


POSITIVE LEGIONELLA REMEDIATION ACTION! 
TEST SITES 
< 30 * Maintain environmental assessment and Legionella monitoring in accordance with the water management plan. 


Immediately institute short-term control measures in accordance with the direction of a qualified professional,” 


and notify the Authority Having Jurisdiction, if required. 


The water system shall be re-sampled no sooner than 7 days and no later than 4 weeks after disinfection to deter- 


mine the efficacy of the treatment. 


For persistent results, as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, showing = 30 percent positive sites, 
long-term control measures shall be implemented in accordance with the direction of a qualified professional” 
and the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Retreat and retest. If retest is = 30 percent positive, repeat short-term control measures. 


With receipt of results < 30 percent positive, resume monitoring in accordance with the water management plan. 


For persistent results, as determined by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, showing = 30 percent positive sites, 
long-term control measures shall be implemented in accordance with the direction of a qualified professional” 
and the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Notes: 

! [n the event that one or more cases of legionellosis are, or may be, associated with the facility, the sampling interpretation shall be in accordance with the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. 

? Control measures shall be included in the water management plan. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 529 


« 


530 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX O - NON-SEWERED SANITATION SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 531 


532 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX O 
NON-SEWERED SANITATION SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


O 101.0 General. 


O 101.1 Applicability. The provisions ofthis appendix shall 
apply to the installation of non-sewered sanitation systems. 


O 101.2 System Requirements. Non-sewered sanitation 
systems shall comply with ANSI/CAN/IAPMO/ISO 30500. 


O 201.0 Definitions. 


O 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 


Conditioned Space. An area, room, or space normally 
occupied and being heated or cooled for human habitation by 
any equipment. 

Non-Sewered Sanitation System. A prefabricated inte- 
grated sewage treatment unit that is not connected to a pub- 
lic sewer or private sewage disposal system. 


O 301.0 Installation. 


O 301.1 General. The installation of non-sewered sanita- 
tion systems shall be in accordance with the manufacturer's 
installation instructions and with Section O 301.2 through 
Section O 301.7. 


O 301.2. Operating Conditions. A non-sewered sanita- 
tion system in either a conditioned or unconditioned space 
shall be installed where the ambient temperature, ambient 
humidity, and altitude (atmospheric pressure) are in accor- 
dance with the manufacturer's installation instructions or 
product listing. 


O 301.3 Clearances for Servicing and Maintenance. 
A non-sewered sanitation system shall be located to permit 
access and sufficient clearance for service and maintenance. 
Unless otherwise specified by the manufacturer's installation 
instructions, not less than 30 inches (762 mm) in depth, width, 
and height of working space shall be provided at any access 
panel. 


O 301.4 Backflow Prevention. A domestic water supply 
connection to a non-sewered sanitation system shall be pro- 
tected in accordance with this code. 


O 301.5 Effluent Storage. Any container or vessel for the 
storage of effluent discharged from a non-sewered sanitation 
system and not integral to such system shall be installed in 
accordance with the plumbing code. 

O 301.6 Systems Employing Combustion. A non-sew- 
ered sanitation system employing combustion shall comply 
with the mechanical code. 

O 301.7 Connection to Plumbing System Not 
Required. Unless the Authority Having Jurisdiction deter- 
mines otherwise, a non-sewered sanitation system is not 
required to be connected to the drainage system of the build- 
ing or premises. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


O 401.0 Manual Required. 


O 401.1 Operation and Maintenance Manual. Non- 
sewered sanitation systems shall have an operation and main- 
tenance manual provided by the manufacturer. 


O 501.0 System Output. 


O 501.1 General. The use or disposal of all substances exit- 
ing the non-sewered sanitation system shall be determined by 
the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


533 


534 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX P - PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR |CEC| CA | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 | 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 535 


536 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX P 
PROFESSIONAL QUALIFICATIONS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


P 101.0 General. 


P 101.1 Scope. The provisions of this appendix address 
minimum qualifications for installers, inspectors, or employ- 
ers for systems covered within the scope of this code. 


P 102.0 Qualifications. 


P 102.1 General. Where permits are required, the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction shall have the authority to require con- 
tractors, installers, or service technicians to demonstrate 
competency. Where determined by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction, the contractor or technicians shall be licensed or 
certified to perform such work. Professional qualifications 
shall be required for an individual to demonstrate the required 
level of competency. 


P 102.2 Inspectors and Plans Examiners. Professional 
qualification for plumbing inspectors and plumbing plans 
examiners shall be qualified in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 16000. 


P 102.2.1 Qualification for Plumbing Inspector. 
Professional qualification for plumbing inspectors shall 
be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 16010. 


P 102.2.2 Qualification for Plumbing Plan Exam- 
iner. Professional qualification for plumbing plans exam- 
iners shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 
16040. 


P 102.3 Service Plumber Technician. Professional qual- 
ification for plumbing service technicians shall be qualified to 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 13000. 

P 102.3.1 Qualification for Service Plumbers. 


Professional qualification for service plumbers shall be in 
accordance ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 13010. 


P 102.4 Cross-Connection Control. Professional quali- 
fication for cross-connection control professionals shall be in 
accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 5000. 


P 102.4.1 Qualification for Backflow Testers. Pro- 
fessional qualification for backflow assembly testers 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5110. 


P 102.42 Qualification for Surveyors. Professional 
qualification for cross-connection assembly surveyors 
shall be qualified in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 
5120. 

P 102.4.3 Qualification for Repairers. Professional 
qualification for backflow prevention assembly repairers 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5130. 
P 102.4.4 Qualification for Fire Protection Sys- 
tems. Professional qualification for backflow assembly 


testers of fire protection systems shall be in accordance 
with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 5140. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


P 102.4.5 Qualification for Program Administrator. 
Professional qualification for backflow prevention admin- 
istrator shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 
5150. 


P 102.5 Medical Gas Systems. Professional qualification 
for medical gas systems personnel shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 6000. 


P 102.5.1 Qualification for Medical Gas Installers. 
Professional qualification for medical gas system installers 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6010. 


P 102.5.2 Qualification for Bulk Medical Gas/Cryo- 
genic Fluid Installers. Professional qualification for 
bulk medical gas/cryogenic fluid installers shall be in 
accordance ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6015. 


P 102.5.3 Qualification for Medical Gas Systems 
Inspectors. Professional qualification for medical gas 
systems inspectors shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6020. 


P 102.5.4 Qualification for Medical Gas System 
Verifiers. Professional qualification for medical gas 
system verifiers shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6030. 


P 102.5.5 Qualification for Bulk Medical Gas/Cryo- 
genic Fluid Central Supply System Verifiers. Pro- 
fessional qualification for bulk medical gas/cryogenic fluid 
central supply system verifiers shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6035. 


P 102.5.6 Qualification for Medical Gas Systems 
Maintenance. Professional qualification for medical 
gas systems maintenance personnel shall be in accor- 
dance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 6040. 


P 102.6 Residential Potable Water Fire Sprinkler Sys- 
tem Installers and Inspectors for One- and Two-Fam- 
ily Dwellings. Professional qualification for residential 
potable water fire protection system installers and inspectors 
for one- and two-family dwellings shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 7000. 


P 102.6.1 Qualification for Installers. Professional 
qualification for persons who provide layout, detail and cal- 
culations for residential potable water fire protection sys- 
tems for one- and two-family dwellings and install such 
systems shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 
7010. 


P 102.6.2 Qualification for Inspectors. Professional 
qualification for inspectors of residential potable water 
fire protection systems for one- and two-family dwelling 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 7020. 


537 


APPENDIX P 


P 102.7 Water Management and Infection Control 
Risk Assessment for Building Systems. Professional 
qualification for construction and maintenance personnel and 
employers to identify and manage potentially hazardous 
exposure to bloodborne, waterborne and airborne pathogens. 
Also includes qualifications for members of a water safety 
team involved in the development of a risk assessment analy- 
sis, and water management and sampling plan, for protection 
from Legionella and other waterborne pathogens and persons 
who conduct a facility risk assessment and implement a water 
safety and management program to reduce the risk of infec- 
tions due to Legionella. Qualifications are in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI Series 12000. 


P 102.71 Environment of Care, Infection Control 
and Construction Risk Assessment Profes- 
sional Qualification Standard. Professional qualifi- 
cation for general knowledge of the environment of care, 
infection control and construction risk assessment pro- 
cedures to protect facility operations, occupants, workers 
or any individual who has the potential for harm caused 
by construction activities shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12010. 


P 102.72 Environment of Care, Infection Control 
and Construction Risk Assessment Profes- 
sional Qualification Standard for Construction 
and Maintenance Employers. Professional qualifi- 
cation for general knowledge of the environment of care, 
infection control and construction risk assessment 
requirements and procedures to protect facility opera- 
tions, occupants, workers, or any individual who has the 
potential for harm caused by construction activities shall 
be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12020. It 
also provides general knowledge of employer responsi- 
bilities to the worker and to the facility. 


P 102.73 Water Quality Program Professional 
Qualifications Standard for Employers and Des- 
ignated Representatives. Professional qualification 
for employers and designated representatives imple- 
menting water quality programs shall be in accordance 
with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12060. 


P 102.74 Qualification for Water Quality Pro- 
gram, Plumbers. Professional qualification for 
plumbers implementing a water quality program shall be 
in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12061. 


P 102.75 Qualification for Water Quality Program 
and Pipefitters. Professional qualification for pipefit- 
ters implementing a water quality program shall be in 
accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12062. 


P 102.76 Qualification for Water Quality Program, 
Sprinkler Fitters. Professional qualification for sprin- 
kler fitters implementing a water quality program shall be 
in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 12063. 


P 102.77 Legionella Water Safety and Manage- 
ment Specialist. Professional qualification for persons 
who conduct a facility risk assessment and implement a 
water safety and management program to reduce the risk 
of infections due to Legionella shall be in accordance 
with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSIT 12080. 


538 


P 102.8 Rainwater Catchment System Personnel. Pro- 
fessional qualification for designers and installers of rainwater 
catchment systems, and inspectors of rainwater/stormwater 
catchment systems shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/ARCSA/IAPMO/ANSI Series 21000. 
P 102.8.1 Qualification for Installer. Professional 
qualification for rainwater catchment systems installers 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 21110. 
P 102.8.2 Qualification for Designer. Professional 
qualification for rainwater catchment system designers 
shall be in accordance with ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 21120. 
P 102.8.3 Qualification for Inspectors. Professional 
qualification for rainwater and stormwater catchment 


systems inspectors shall be in accordance with 
ASSE/IAPMO/ANSI 21130. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX Q - INDOOR HORTICULTURAL FACILITIES 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 1 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 539 


540 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX Q 
INDOOR HORTICULTURAL FACILITIES 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


Q 101.0 Indoor Horticultural Facilities. 

Q 101.1 General. Plumbing for indoor horticulture facili- 
ties shall be in accordance with this code. This appendix shall 
apply to primary and secondary horticulture facilities. 


Q 201.0 Definitions. 

Q 201.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 

Agricultural Water. Water used in indoor horticulture activ- 
ities where water is intended to contact plants. 

Cultivation Room. A room of any size where plants are 
grown under controlled conditions. Also known as a grow room. 
Fertigation. The process of adding nutrients into the irriga- 
tion water. 

Horticulture Facility. A business, facility, or establishment 
where indoor horticulture is grown, cultivated, dried, 
extracted, weighed, packaged, or processed. 

Indoor Horticulture. The cultivation and processing of 
plants in an indoor space. 

Indoor Horticulture Water Distribution Systems. A 
system to supply water from its primary source to its point of 
use, including but not limited to pipes, sprinklers, irrigation 
equipment, pumps, valves, storage tanks, meters, and fittings. 
Nutrient. Substances, chemicals, or ingredients used to pro- 
mote growth, provide energy, and/or sustain plants. 

Plant. A multicellular organism having cellulose cell walls 
intended for human consumption, ingestion, inhalation, or 
topical application. 

Primary Horticulture Facility. A facility devoted to the 
growing and/or harvesting of plants. Cultivation rooms are 
located within these facilities. 

Secondary Horticulture Facility. A facility devoted to 
harvesting (such as hulling or shelling), packing, and/or hold- 
ing of plants. 


Q 301.0 Classification of Facilities. 

Q 301.1 General. Facilities used for indoor horticultural cul- 
tivation and processing shall be in accordance with the appli- 
cable codes as mandated by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 
Q 301.2 Approved Locations. Facilities used for indoor 
horticultural cultivation and processing shall be located in 
accordance with the building code and the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


Q 401.0 Documentation. 


Q 401.1 General. Documentation for permitting shall be 
provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 
104.0 and the Authority Having Jurisdiction. The documen- 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


tation shall show compliance with this section and other 
requirements in accordance with the Authority Having Juris- 
diction. 


Q 501.0 General. 


Q 501.1 Mechanical Systems. Indoor horticulture 
mechanical systems shall be in accordance with the mechan- 
ical code. 


Q 501.2 Fire Suppression Systems. Fire suppression 
systems shall be in accordance with the building code and fire 
code. 


Q 501.3 Emergency Eyewash and Shower Equip- 
ment. Emergency shower and eyewash equipment shall be 
required in accordance with Section 416.0. 


Q 601.0 Water Supply. 


Q 601.1 General. Indoor horticulture water distribution sys- 
tems shall be supplied with potable water in accordance with 
Chapter 6. 


Q 601.2 Materials. Pipe, tube, and fitting materials in con- 
tact with potable water, drinking water, or both shall be in 
accordance with Section 604.0. 


Q 601.3 Protection. Potable water piping used for irriga- 
tion purposes shall be equipped with an approved backflow 
prevention device or assembly in accordance with Table 
603.2. 


Q 601.4 Alternate Water Supply. Where permitted, agri- 
cultural water may be used or alternate water sources in 
accordance with Appendix K. 


Q 701.0 Storage Tanks. 


Q 701.1 Construction. Where storage tanks are used, they 
shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction. Potable 
water storage tanks shall comply with Section 607.0. Rainwa- 
ter catchment storage tanks shall comply with Appendix K or 
in accordance with the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


Q 801.0 Fertigation and Irrigation Equipment. 


Q 801.1 Installation. Nutrient tanks and irrigation equip- 
ment shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s 
instructions. When connected to the potable water supply, 
tanks and irrigation equipment shall be located downstream of 
water storage tank and be protected by an approved backflow 
device or method in accordance with Table 603.2 

Q 801.2 Materials and Construction. The piping, com- 
ponents, and devices shall be compatible with the additives or 
nutrients used. Above grade storage tanks shall be of an 
opaque material, approved for aboveground use in direct sun- 
light, or shall be shielded from direct sunlight. 


541 


APPENDIX Q 


Q 901.0 Sanitary Drainage and Indirect Wastes. 


Q 901.1 General. Sanitary drainage shall be in accordance 
with Chapter 7. Indirect wastes shall be in accordance with 
Chapter 8. The drainage system shall be compatible with the 
discharge liquid waste. 


Q 901.2 Hazardous Materials. Hazardous materials shall 
not be discharged into the sanitary sewer, storm drain, or on 
the ground. 


Q 901.3 Agricultural Water Waste. Agricultural water 
shall be discharged in accordance with the local, state, and 
federal regulations as approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. Where agricultural water discharges to the out- 
doors, and 1s not connected to the sanitary sewer, the piping 
shall be installed as to restrict rodents or vermin from enter- 
ing the building. 
Q 901.4 Floor Drains, Floor Sinks, and Receptors. 
Wastewater shall discharge into an approved receptor. Recep- 
tors shall be compatible with the wastewater and installed in 
accordance with this code. 
Q 901.4.1 Plant Storage Areas. Where drains are 
provided in spaces where plants are stored, such drains 
shall be installed with indirect waste piping. Each indi- 
rect waste pipe from plant storage areas shall be sepa- 
rately piped to the indirect waste receptor and shall not 
combine with other indirect waste pipes. 


Q 1001.0 Facilities. 


Q 1001.1 Toilet Facilities. Toilet facilities shall be provided 
in accordance with the occupancy type. 


Q 1001.2 Location. Toilet facilities shall be located in such 
a manner to prevent contamination of plants during harvest- 
ing, holding, manufacturing/processing, and packing. 


542 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX R - TINY HOUSES 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 
1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC 1 102 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X 
Adopt Entire Chapter as 


amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 543 


544 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX R 
TINY HOUSES 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


R 101.0 Tiny Houses. 

R 101.1 Applicability. This appendix shall apply to struc- 
tures permanently attached to a foundation. The tiny house 
plumbing systems shall be designed and installed in accor- 
dance with the requirements of this appendix and the require- 
ments of this code. The provision of this appendix shall apply 
to permanent structures of 400 square feet (37 m?)or less. The 
provisions of this appendix shall not apply to recreational 
vehicles as defined in NFPA 1192 or to manufactured homes 
as defined in NFPA 501A. 


R 102.0 Definitions. 

R 102.1 General. For purposes of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definition shall apply: 

Tiny House. A single family dwelling that, is not greater 
than 400 square feet (37 m°), not including loft area. 


R 103.0. General. 

R 103.1 Permits and Construction Documents. Per- 
mits and construction documents shall be submitted and 
approved in accordance with Section 104.0. 

R 103.2 Fuel-Gas Piping System. Gas piping system 
shall be sized and installed in accordance with Chapter 12. 
R 103.3 Water Heaters. Water heaters shall be installed in 
accordance with Chapter 5 and the manufacturer's recom- 
mendations and instructions. 

R 103.4 Potable Water Sources. Where a public water 
supply system is available, it shall be used. Private or alter- 
nate water sources shall comply with the potable water stan- 
dards of the state, and local health authority. 

R 103.5 Water Supply to Fixtures. Each plumbing fix- 
ture shall be provided with an adequate supply of potable 
water in accordance with Chapter 6. 

R 103.6 Protection of Potable Water. The potable water 
supply shall be protected from pollution and contamination in 
accordance with Section 602.0 and Section 603.0. Backflow 
prevention shall be in accordance with Table 603.2. 

R 103.7 Water-Treatment Equipment. Where installed, 
water-treatment equipment shall comply with the require- 
ments of Section 611.0. 

R 103.8 Testing. Installations of water supply, drainage, and 
venting systems shall be tested and inspected in accordance 
with the requirements of this code. 


R 201.0 Tiny House Fixtures. 


R 201.1 Fixtures. Plumbing fixtures shall comply with the 
requirements of Chapter 4. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


R 201.2 Kitchen. Each tiny house shall be provided with a 
kitchen sink. 


R 201.3 Bathroom. Each tiny house shall be provided with 
not less than one water closet, one lavatory, and one bath, 
shower or combination bath/shower. 


R 201.4 Bathtubs and Whirlpool Bathtubs. Where 
installed, bathtubs and whirlpool bathtubs shall be in accor- 
dance with Section 409.0. 


R 201.5 Showers Compartments. Where installed, 
shower compartment enclosures shall be not less than 30 
inches (762 mm) wide by 30 inches (762 mm) long. 


R 201.6 Water Closet. Water closets shall be in accordance 
with Section 411.0. 


R 201.7 Lavatories. Lavatories shall be in accordance with 
Section 407.0. 


R 202.0 Tiny House Water Supply System. 


R 202.1 Water Service Outlet. Each tiny house shall be 
provided with a water service outlet delivering potable water. 
The water service outlet riser shall be not less than % of an 
inch (20 mm) nominal pipe size. 

R 202.2 Sizing Water Supply and Distribution Sys- 
tems. Water distribution systems shall be sized in accor- 
dance with Section 610.0. Water supply piping, joints, and 
connections shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 6. 


R 202.3 Pressure. Each tiny house water distribution sys- 
tem shall be so designed and maintained at not less than 15 
pounds force per square inch (psi) (103 kPa) at each fixture 
inlet in accordance with Section 608.1. Water pressure 
exceeding 80 psi (552 kPa), shall be limited in accordance 
with Section 608.2. 


R 203.0 Tiny House Drain, Waste, and Vent (DWV) 
System. 

R 203.1 General. Sanitary drain, waste, and vent (DWV) 
systems shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 7 and 
Chapter 9. The DWV system shall connect to the public san- 
itary waste system. Private sewage disposal systems shall be 
permitted where approved by the Authority Having Jurisdic- 
tion. See Appendix H for private sewage disposal system gen- 
eral guidelines. 


545 


546 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE - MATRIX ADOPTION TABLE 
APPENDIX S - ONSITE STORMWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS 
(Matrix Adoption Tables are non-regulatory, intended only as an aid to the code user. See Chapter 1 for state agency authority and building applications.) 


| BSC- HCD DSA OSHPD 
Adopting Agency BSC CG SFM BSCC | DPH | AGR |DWR СЕС СА | SL |SLC 


1 | 2 |1-АС | AC | SS | SS/CC | 1 102 3 4 5 6 
Adopt Entire Chapter X 


Adopt Entire Chapter as 
amended (amended 
sections listed below) 


Adopt only those sections 
that are listed below 


Chapter/Section 


This state agency does not adopt sections identified with the following symbol: + 
The Office of the State Fire Marshal's adoption of this chapter or individual sections is applicable to structures regulated by other state agencies pursuant to 
Section 1.11.0. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 547 


548 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX S 
ONSITE STORMWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS 


The provisions contained in this appendix are not mandatory unless specifically adopted by a state agency, or referenced in the 


adopting ordinance. 


S 101.0 Onsite Stormwater Treatment Systems. 


S 101.1 General. The provisions of this appendix shall apply 
to the water quality, monitoring, design, construction, alter- 
ation, repair, and operation requirements of onsite stormwa- 
ter treatment systems for nonpotable use. 


S 101.2 Allowable Use of Stormwater. Where approved 
or required by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, stormwater 
shall be permitted to be used in lieu of potable water for uses 
such as, but not limited to, water closets, urinals, clothes 
washers, ornamental plant irrigation, and dust suppression. 


S 101.3 Design and Construction Requirements. 
Onsite stormwater treatment systems shall meet the design, 
construction, and performance requirements of Section S 
101.3.1 or Section S 101.3.2. 


S 101.3.1 Listed Stormwater Treatment Systems. 
Onsite stormwater treatment systems shall be listed to 
ARCSA/ASPE 78, installed according to the manufac- 
turer's instructions, and commissioned in accordance 
with Section S 101.13. 


S 101.3.2 Alternative Design Systems. Where 
approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction, onsite 
stormwater treatment systems for residential and com- 
mercial applications shall comply with the provisions of 
Sections S 101.4 through Section S 101.15. 


S 101.4 Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to con- 
struct, install, alter, or cause to be constructed, installed, or 
altered any stormwater treatment system in a building or on 
a premise without first obtaining a permit to do such work 
from the Authority Having Jurisdiction. 


S 101.5 Component Identification. System components 
shall be properly identified as to the manufacturer. 


S 101.6 Material Compatibility. Stormwater treatment sys- 
tems shall be constructed of materials that are compatible 
with the type of pipe and fitting materials, water treatment, 
and water conditions in the system. 


S 101.7 Log Reduction Targets. Stormwater treatment sys- 
tems shall be designed to meet the log reduction targets as set 
forth in Table S 101.7. To meet the log reduction in Table S 
101.7, treatment processes used in stormwater systems shall 
comply with Section S 101.8 for validation or be operated 
according to conditions approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 

S 101.8 Effluent Water Quality Parameters. Stormwater 
treatment systems shall be designed to meet the effluent water 


quality parameters for water closet and urinal fixture use 
listed in Table S 101.8. 


S 101.9 Validation. Where required by the Authority Hav- 
ing Jurisdiction, treatment processes shall be tested to verify 
the pathogen reduction performance. The treatment processes 
shall be validated through third-party component validation or 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


field verification using challenge testing. The results of the 
third-party component validation and/or challenge testing 
shall be summarized in a validation report prepared by a reg- 
istered design professional. The validation report shall docu- 
ment the treatment technology's log reduction performance, 
including information on the operating conditions and surro- 
gate parameters. 


TABLE S 101.7 
LOG REDUCTION TARGETS FOR 10“ INFECTIONS PER 
PERSON PERYEAR BENCHMARKS FOR STORMWATER 
TREATMENT SYSTEMS 


ENTERIC | PARASITIC | ENTERIC 
VIRUSES |PROTOZOA | BACTERIA 


STORMWATER GREATER THAN 0.1% FECAL 
CONTAMINATION CONTRIBUTION? 


WATER USE SCENARIO 


radical 
Ornamental plant irrigation / 50 45 40 
dust suppression 

Indoor use 5.5 5.5 5.5 


STORMWATER WITH LESS THAN OR EQUAL TO 0.1% FECAL 
CONTAMINATION CONTRIBUTION? 


T TAURI 
Ornamental plant irrigation / 30 2.5 2.0 
dust suppression 

Indoor use 3.5 3.5 3.0 
Notes: 

! Non-food. 


? Stormwater can contain some quantity of fecal contamination. The extent 


of fecal contamination present will depend on site-specific conditions. 
The appropriate LRT to apply for a stormwater treatment system depend 
on the site-specific extent of likely contamination of stormwater with fecal 
contamination. 


TABLE S 101.8 
EFFLUENT WATER QUALITY PARAMETERS FOR WATER 
CLOSET AND URINAL FIXTURE USE 


MINIMUM MAXIMUM 

Alkalinity mg/L 20 200 
TDS mg/L 0 500 
Turbidity NTU 0 5 

pH 6.0 9.0 
Odor Non-Offensive 

Oily Film and Foam Visual Non-detectable 
Free Chlorine Residual ppm NA 4 
Combined Chlorine ppm NA 4 
Chloramines mg/L NA 4 


S 101.10 Health and Safety. Potable water systems shall 
be protected against nonpotable water in accordance with 
Section 602.0 and Section 603.0 of this code. 


549 


APPENDIX S 


S 101.11 Monitoring Requirements. Monitoring of 
stormwater treatment systems shall be based on the risk level 
in accordance with Table S 101.11(1). The parameters listed 
in Table S 101.11(2) shall be monitored by sensors placed in 
the effluent of the system and connected to a smart controller. 
The smart controller shall activate an alarm when the param- 
eters in Table S 101.11(2) are outside the specifications and 
shall shut the system down when the alarm is not acknowl- 
edged after a period of 8 hours has elapsed. For Category 2, 
quarterly grab samples shall be taken out of the effluent and 
analyzed by an accredited lab. The sensors' accuracy and 
response shall be validated upon commissioning of the sys- 
tem by an independent third party. 


TABLE S 101.11(1) 


RISK LEVELS 
RISK LEVEL TREATED WATER USAGE* 
1 Ornamental plant irrigation and dust suppression 
2 Water closets, urinals, clothes washers 


* See Section S 101.2 for other uses approved by the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


TABLE S 101.11(2) 
MONITORING PARAMETERS 


PARAMETERS TO BE VALIDATION 
CATEGORY 
MONITORED PROCEDURE 
Turbidity 
1 ORP 
UV intensity (1f used) 
Turbidity IAPMO IGC 324 - Sensor 
ORP validation procedure using 
| к, 5.4.1.1 (a), (b), (c), and 
2 UV intensity (if used) (d)., as applicable 
pH 
Quarterly lab Sample 
for Total Coliform 


S 101.12 Design and Installation. The design and instal- 
lation of onsite stormwater treatment systems shall meet the 
requirements of Section S 101.12.1 through Section S 
101.12.6. 


S 101.12.1 Connections to Potable or Reclaimed 
(Recycled) Water Systems. Stormwater treatment sys- 
tems shall have no direct connection to any potable water 
supply or reclaimed (recycled) water source system. 
Potable water or reclaimed (recycled) water shall be per- 
mitted to be used as makeup water for a stormwater treat- 
ment system provided the potable or reclaimed (recycled) 
water supply connection is protected by an airgap. 


S 101.12.2 Bypass Connection. A bypass shall be 
provided for the input connection to the stormwater treat- 
ment system. The bypass shall be a diverter valve nor- 
mally open to the stormwater treatment system. The 
normally closed port of the diverter valve shall be con- 
nected directly to the storm drainage system or combined 
sewer system in accordance with this code. 


550 


S 101.12.3 Overflow Connection. Stormwater treat- 
ment overflow shall be connected directly to the storm 
drainage or combined sewer system in accordance with 
this code. The overflow shall be provided with a back- 
water valve at the point of connection to the storm 
drainage or combined sewer system. The backwater 
valve shall be accessible for inspection and maintenance. 


S 101.12.4 Fail-Safe Mechanisms. Stormwater treat- 
ment systems shall be equipped with an automatic shut- 
down device of the treatment process in the event of a 
malfunction. 


S 101.12.5 Flow Meter Totalizer. Buildings with 
stormwater treatment systems shall include a flow meter 
totalizer on the treated stormwater distribution system 
and a flow meter totalizer on the potable make-up water 
pipeline to the stormwater treatment system. 


S 101.12.6 Cross-Connection Inspection and 
Testing. A cross-connection test is required in accor- 
dance with Section 1502.0. Before the building is occu- 
pied or the system is activated, the installer shall perform 
the initial cross-connection test in the presence of the 
Authority Having Jurisdiction. The test shall be ruled 
successful by the Authority Having Jurisdiction before 
final approval is granted. 


S 101.13 Commissioning. Onsite stormwater treatment 
systems shall be commissioned in accordance with the 
requirements of Section S 101.13.1 through Section S 
101.13.4. 
S 101.13.1 Commissioning Requirements. Com- 
missioning for stormwater treatment systems shall be 
included in the design and construction processes of the 
project. Commissioning shall be performed by a person 
who demonstrates competency in commissioning 
stormwater treatment systems as required by the Author- 
ity Having Jurisdiction. 
S 101.13.2 Commissioning Plan. The construction 
documents shall include the commissioning plan for the 
stormwater treatment system. The commissioning plan 
shall be approved by the Authority Having Jurisdiction 
prior to commissioning the stormwater treatment system. 
The commissioning plan shall include the following: 
(1) General project information. 
(2) Equipment to be tested, including the test method- 
ology. 
(3) Processes to be tested. 


(4) Criteria or process for testing. 

(5) Criteria or process for acceptance. 

(6) Commissioning team contact information. 

(7) Commissioning process activities, schedules, and 
responsibilities. 

(8) Plans for the completion of functional performance 
testing, post construction documentation and train- 
ing, and the commissioning report. 

S 101.13.3 Performance Testing. Performance tests 

shall verify that the installation and operation of the 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


equipment of the stormwater treatment system is in 
accordance with the approved plans and specifications. 
The performance test report shall include the equipment 
tested, the testing methods utilized, and proof of proper 
calibration of the equipment. 


S 101.13.4 Commissioning Report. The commis- 
sioning report shall be submitted to the Authority Having 
Jurisdiction. 


S 101.14 Operation and Maintenance Manual. An 

operation and maintenance manual shall be provided in accor- 

dance with Section 1501.6 and shall also include the follow- 

ing: 

(1) Instructions on operating and maintaining the system, 
including treatment process operations, instrumentation 
and alarms, and chemicals storage and handling. 


(2) Site equipment inventory and maintenance notes. 


(3) Equipment/system warranty documentation and infor- 
mation. 


(4) As-built design drawings. 
(5) Details on training requirements and qualifications of 
personnel responsible for operating the system. 


(6) Maintenance schedule. 


S 101.15 Inspection. Field inspections shall take place dur- 
ing and after construction while the contractor is on-site to 
verify that the stormwater treatment system components have 
been properly supplied and installed according to the plans 
and specifications used for installation. Record drawings shall 
be maintained with changes to the approved plans by the con- 
tractor and available for periodic inspection as needed. 


S 102.0 Definitions. 


S 102.1 General. For the purpose of this appendix, the fol- 
lowing definitions shall apply: 


Challenge Test. The evaluation of a unit treatment process 
for pathogen log,, reduction performance using selected sur- 
rogate or indigenous constituents. This includes a detailed 
technology evaluation study conducted to challenge the treat- 
ment technology over a wide range of operational conditions. 


Commissioning. The activities associated with bringing a 
new process into normal working condition. 


Field Verification. Performance confirmation study con- 
ducted using challenge testing, including surrogate microor- 
ganisms and/or other non-biological surrogates, usually 
during startup and commissioning. 


Log,, Reduction. The removal of a pathogen or surrogate 
in a unit process expressed in log), units of the effluent con- 
centration over the influent concentration (e.g., a 1-log reduc- 
tion equates to 90% removal, 2-log reduction to 99% 
removal, 3-log reduction to 99.9% removal, and so on). 
Год, Reduction Target (LRT). The log,, reduction target 
for the specified pathogen group (e.g., viruses, bacteria, or 
protozoa) to achieve the identified level of risk to individuals 
(e.g., 10“ infection per year). 

Stormwater. Natural precipitation that has contacted a sur- 
face at grade, below grade, or above ground parking surfaces. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


APPENDIX S 


Surrogate. A biological, chemical, or physical parameter 
used to verify pathogen reductions performances. 


Validation Report. Report documenting the results of a 
challenge test conducted during field verification. 


551 


552 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


USEFUL TABLES 
CONVERSION TABLES 


Note: The information contained in these tables are not part of this American National Standard (ANS) and have not been 
processed in accordance with ANST's requirements for an ANS. As such, these tables may contain material that has not been 
subjected to public review or a consensus process. In addition, they do not contain requirements necessary for conformance to 
the standard. 


UNIT CONVERSIONS 

MULTIPLY BY TO OBTAIN 
ROLES leaked dotes A ызы ich о 43 560 у... Square feet (ft?) 
ს ———— 43 560 sss Cubic feet (ft?) 
ете ее а ee რ" 325:851 н Gallons (U. S. liquid) 
Atmosphere (айа)................2. ныне უხამს" Centimeters of mercury (09C) 
Atmosphere (standard) (atm)....................... -_ 76:0. ctr ed Centimeters of mercury (0°C) 
Atmosphere (standard) (аїт)...................................... 33:905 coit Feet of water (4?C) 
Atmosphere (standard) (atm)...................... sss 29:92 |. m notes Inches of mercury 
Atmosphere (standard) (ат).............................. ისთ” Kilopascals (kPa) 
Atmosphere (standard) (аїт)...................................... 14:702: 8 cete Pounds-force/square inch (Ibf/in?) 
Bartels... ete ee e ehe ””””“” Gallons (gal) 
Battels:. i Hi econ ities Re 158:9873 it Liters (L) 
British thermal units (Btu).........................ssss 1055:055 inii bebes Joules (J) 
British thermal units/hour (Btu/h) ........................ 0.000293 ............................ Kilowatts (kW) 
British thermal units/hour (Btu/h) .............................. ს.-ს!" Watts (W) 
British thermal unit hour (Btu/h).......................... 1:055056 iste Kilojoules (kJ) 
British thermal unit hour (Btu/h).......................... 1055:056 7 Joule (J) 
British thermal units/minute (Btu/min) ...................... Танаа Foot pounds-force/second (ft«Ibf/s) 
British thermal units/minute (Btu/min) .................. 0.02358 ............................ Horsepower (hp) (international) 
British thermal unit per hour square 

foot degree Fahrenheit [Btu/(h«ft^*?F)] ............. 5.678263 ............................ Watt per square meter kelvin [W/(m?*K)] 
British thermal unit inch per hour 

foot degree Fahrenheit [Btuein/(h*ft*?F)] ......0.14442279 ............................ Watt per meter kelvin [W/(m*K)] 
Candelas per square inch (cd/im?)................ 1.550003 x 107............................ Candela per square meters (cd/m?) 
სეუს. სოს” ''''"'""!"" SCR X-ო-ს”"ს'' tee Kelvin (k) 
Celsius (^ GJ). tne EU IU LSR CF სა ათა“ d bee Fahrenheit (°F) 
Centimeters. (ету: ааа инр 0:393 7 c e teer Inches (in) 
Centimeters of mercury (0°С)................................ 0.01316............................ Atmosphere (standard) 
Centimeters of mercury (0®°С)................................... "”'””'''""” Feet of water (4?C) 
Centimeters of mercury (0°С).............ул QT КОЛО СОГ Pounds-force/square feet (Ibf/ft) 
Centimeters of mercury (0°C) ............... sss ОТОЗА: scu Pounds-force/square inch (Ibf/in?) 
Circümference iere et es საიას”! Radians (rad) 
Cubic feet (fb) «ae ette tete e e ie T1728. totes Cubic inches (in?) 
Cubic feet (f£) sees 0.0283 ............................ Cubic meters (m?) 
Cubic féet(ft yz tete e e 0:03704 cette Cubic yards (yd?) 
Cubic feet (Hl. е Re E ”/წ/' 41:48052. s й Gallons (U.S. liquid) (gal) 
Cubic feet (fP) აუუულედევღლღლღუუუუ  -– 28:32: 5. а deles Liters (L) 
Cubic feet (ft) «iig eR S 29:92 c ae Quarts (U.S. liquid) 
Cubic feet/hour (ft/h).............sssssseeene 0.0283: eet Cubic meters/hour (m?/h) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


553 


USEFUL TABLES 


554 


UNIT CONVERSIONS (continued) 


MULTIPLY BY 

Cubic feet/minute (fP/min)............... sss 0.000472 
Cubic feet/minute (@?Лтїїй))..................2.ззз.. 0.1247 
Cubic feet/minute (IL /იიი)...... cece 0.47194 
Cubic feet/second (#2/).........................5.][у][у[ү 646 316.89 
Cubic feet/second (IL /5) .............. sss 448.831 
Cubic inches (in?) sse 1.64 x 10? 
Cubic inches (in?) ა 0.01639 
Cubic meters (пл?).............. 264.17 
Cubic yards (уй?)...................... 27 
Cubic vards(vd?)« ааа аа 0.76455 
Cubic yards (yd?)........... sse 201.97 
Degrees (дер). : eine eee 0.0174 
Fahrenheit (ОЕ) кинини sss (?F-32)/1.8 
Eeet (ft) n sortie ЛУ 0.3048 
Feet (ft) e ''>”"""”"”” 304.8 
Feet of water (4°C) ыи ниниди ЫЫ 0.0295 
Feet of water (4°C) ......... sse 0.8827 
Feet. of water (4°C) x s e RE ees 62.43 
Feet of water (4°C) ......... sse 0.4335 
Feet/minute იორ  __ нен 0.01667 
Feet/minute ხი...  __ 0.01136 
Feet/sëecond (ft/s) езинин ини "" Н 0.3048 
Feet/second (fts): minnn 0.6818 
Feet/second (#05): ce eee 0.01136 
Foot lambert (fL) .................. sse 3.426259 
Foot pounds-force ნა საიიიიაა.Cდდ-= 1.355 
Foot pounds-force/minute (fteIbf/min) ............. 2.260 x 10? 
Foot pounds-force/second (ft«Ibf/s).................. 1.356 x 10? 
Gallons (U.S. liquid) (gal)....................... sss 231 
Gallons (U.S. liquid) (еа1).................................... 0.003785 
Gallons (U.S. liquid) (ва1)........................................ 0.1337 
Gallons (U.S. liquid) (еа1).......................................... 3.785 
Gallons (U.S. liquid) (gal)..................... sss 4 
Gallons/day............. eene 4.3 x 10? 
Gallons/minute (gal/min) (gpm)............................... 8.0208 
Gallons/minute (gal/min) (gpm)..................... 0.003785412 
Gallons/minute (gal/min) (gpm)............................. 0.00223 
Gallons/minute (gal/min) (gpm)................. 6.309020 x 10° 
Gallons/minute (gal/min) (орт)............................. 0.06309 
Grains (gr)... esse deiecti 0.00006479 
Horsepower (р) treten 0.7457 
Horsepower-hours.................. ლლ---- 2.684 x 10*6 
Iთლონსასსსსსყყიტთდტთ„შიუიი=“'' 0.7457 
Inch (water column at 60°Е)................................... 0.24884 
Inches (1n). etm rete eO 2.54 


TO OBTAIN 


.-– Cubic meters/second (m/s) 
p EE riens e Gallons/second 
——— & Liters/second (L/s) 
_–_–__. ” Gallons/day 
NEN Gallons/minute (gpm) 
TREE Cubic meters (m?) 
E Liters (L) 

;” Gallons (U.S. liquid) 
„ხს Cubic feet (ft?) 
Е. Cubic meters (m?) 
–_–_::.” Gallons (U.S. liquid) 

Wand RV Ge Radians (rad) 
ა" Celsius (°C) 
'' Meters (m) 
-----_.-–_- Millimeters (mm) 
–--_–__ _ Atmosphere (standard) (atm) 
КОРОРУ Inches of mercury (0°С) 
NITET Pounds-force/square feet 
eO indt Pounds-force/square inch 
RH en ds Feet/second (ft/s) 
NIRE AIO Miles/hour (mi/h) 
““რსს“”"'")ს ИТ Meters/second (m/s) 
”""'"'' Miles/hour (mi/h) 
””"'!"ჩ'” Miles/minute (mi/min) 
Uo tereti Candela per square meter (cd/m?) 
mn Joules (J) 

>. –- Kilowatts (kW) 

T RE Kilowatts (kW) 
__" Cubic inches (in?) 
აეეე. | Cubic meters (m?) 

UADIT иа Cubic feet (ft?) 
—Á€—— Liters (L) 

м Quarts (0.5. liquid) 

MAE ЧН ККЕ, Liters/second 
ეე––> Cubic feet/hour (ft/h) 
აე“. x Cubic meters/minute (m?/min) 
Ves ыс ал сын Cubic feet/second (ft/s) 
„"""' Cubic meters/second (m/s) 
0.” Liters/second (L/s) 

E Kilograms (kg) 
E Kilowatts (kW) 
ETE Joules (J) 

——' Kilowatt-hours (kWeh) 
REN Kilopascals (kPa) 

M MINUM: Centimeters (cm) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


UNIT CONVERSIONS (continued) 


MULTIPLY BY 

use ——————— 25.4 
IüchéS/hout n eter С О. 25.4 
Inches of mercury (0°C) ............... sse 0.03342 
Inches of mercury (0°С)............ ннн. 1.133 
Inches mercury (O°C) еуин индин 3.3863 
Inches of mercury (0°C) ............... sse 0.4912 
Inches of water (4°С))............... უშ” 0.002458 
Inches of water (4?C)............... ” ” 0.07356 
Inches of water (4?C)............... sse 5.202 
Inches of water (4?C)............... _ -_-_- 0.03613 
Joules ღვე" 9.480 x 10^ 
Joules ასანრითო”'"”''''"'!'"'!" 0.7376 
Joules (Т) аа ана 2.778 х 10“ 
“ა სა--––იC"""""''"უ”' °K - 273.15 
Kilograms ლოირლუუ_-<-_<_C6-აე6CეC-6C65-ეა-უ-ა- 2.2046 
Kilograms (Ко)... 1.102 x 10? 
Kilopascals (kPa).................... sse 0.145038 
ირისლოვ–– 0.6214 
Kilometers/hour (km/h) ....................... sss 0.6214 
ჟ––..–_._-__-_-_-_ 3412.14 
Kilowatts აკხლ""''"''"''''""" 1.341 
(ლეას “სულსა. “““სთ”»”'ს"'""''''ს' 3413 
Kilowatt-hours ......c.ccccssessesseseteseeseeesesesneneneees 2.655 x 1075 
Kilowatt-hours cou eu pasce dde 3.6 x 1076 
Kip (1000 Ibf) ............ essen 4.448222 
Кро eter enin 1.35671 
Kips per square inch (КїрЛїп?)................................... 6.8947 
Lambert (la)............. esee 3.183099 x 10? 
“  ““აია”'"'''' '' 0.03531 
Liters: (i) აა-'----“წ'ს”',''!სხ"!ხ' ხს" 61.02 
სმაილ“ tot E te RR T 0.001 
Тег EN 0.2642 
Lumens per square foot (Im/ft?) (footcandle).......10.76391 
Meters (Im)... socie eI nS 3.281 
Meters (m). «ice ehe dee rerom 39.37 
ი ასაა-ს-ა'ი“სსსს»'""!' '"”ძ”'შ'რ 1.094 
წყოთასასსიწეეოთო-–უ–_--ი-__ -_- 3.281 
წაყოოთსსსსიწეეოლივივივე--C·-C·6იტირ-_–_” 2.237 
Miles (mi) '-ოთ–””""'""'''") ENE 5280 
ს (statute ·'_-რ”ხ””””"'”"'"""'")ს" 1.609 
Miles/hoür (ті/)..................... ананан 88 
წყყწყწეუოიი.2.._________ 1.467 
ყწას სია. –––_-_-–_-_-__ 1.609344 
Miles/hour სსა ა. '-–“””"" ""'"''"' 26.82 
ყწიასI სა ––_––––---_--_-_-_____- 0.44704 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


USEFUL TABLES 


TO OBTAIN 


Millimeters (mm) 
Millimeters/hour (mm/h) 
Atmosphere (standard) (atm) 
Feet of water (4?C) 
Kilopascals (kPa) 
Pounds-force/square inch 
Atmosphere (standard) (atm) 
Inches of mercury (0°C) 
Pounds-force/square feet 
Pounds-force/square inch 
British thermal units (Btus) 
Foot-pounds 

Watt-hours 

Celsius (°C) 

Pounds (165) 

Tons (short) 
Pounds-force/square inch 
Miles (statute) 

Miles/hour (mi/h) 

British thermal units/hour (Btus/hour) 
Horsepower (hp) 

British thermal units (Btus) 
Foot-pounds (ft«Ibs) 

Joules (J) 

Kilonewtons (kN) 
Kilonewton meters (kNem) 
Megapascals (MPa) 

Candela per square meter (cd/m?) 
Cubic feet (ft?) 

Cubic inches (in?) 

Cubic meters (m?) 

Gallons (U.S. liquid) 


Feet (ft) 
Inches (in) 


Feet/second (ft/s) 
Miles/hour (mi/h) 

Feet (ft) 

Kilometers (km) 
Feet/minute (ft/min) 
Feet/second (ft/s) 
Kilometers/hour (km/h) 
Meters/minute (m/min) 
Meters/second (m/s) 


555 


USEFUL TABLES 


556 


UNIT CONVERSIONS (continued) 


MULTIPLY BY TO OBTAIN 

Millimeters (mm)................ esee UA ЕК КЕХС: Centimeters (cm) 

Millimeters (mm)................ ჟწიშშ)ს!ს' 0103937 л Inches (in) 

Millimeters (mm)............... sese 0:001... eee Meters (m) 

Minutes (min).............. sese 2.908882 x 10*............................ Radians (rads) 

Ounces/square inch (о2/їп?).................................. 43:94185...... einem Kilograms/square meter (kg/m?) 
Ounces/square feet (oz/ft) ............................... 0.03051517............................ Kilograms/square meter (kg/m?) 
Ounces (07) e tee e e RE 002834 აა inet Kilograms (kg) 

Ouünces (02)... seated eoa OPES 20-5795 9 ub ree pec eiecit Millimeters (mL) 

Pins ons У о тини 0.4731765 ............................ Liters (1) 

Pound-force feet (Ibfeft) ............................... а. 1:355818 iei Newton meters (Nem) 
Pound-force inch (Ibfein).................................... 0:1129848.... eden Newton meters (Nem) 
Pound-force per foot (Ibf/ft) ................................... 14:59395 iiit Newton meters (Nem) 
Pound-force per square foot (Ibf/ft?) .................... 47.88026 ............................ Разса1 (Ра) 

Pound-force per square inch (Ibf/in?) ..................... BIAT O eee Kilopascals (kPa) 

Pound-force per inch (Ibf/in) ................................ წს 5. asses Newton meters (Nem) 
Pounds/cubic inch (Ib/in?) ........................... 2.767990 Xx 10*%............................ Kilograms/cubic meter (kg/m?) 
Pounds/cubic yard (1Ь/уд).................................. 0.5932764 ............................ Kilograms/cubic meter (kg/m?) 
Pounds (Б) iter o is 0.45359 occisos Kilograms (kg) 

Pounds/cubic foot (Ib/ft) .................... sss „სა ”თსს"ს"!' Kilograms/cubic meter (kg/m?) 
Pounds/foot (Ib/ft) .................... sss აა” es Kilograms/meters (kg/m) 
Pounds/square inch (Ibit)... oto asi Dti 703.1 iip Kilograms-force/square meter (kg/m?) 
Pounds/square foot (ТЬ/Ё?).................................... 4.882421 i ecu Kilograms-force/square meter (kg/m?) 
Pounds-force (1Ы#)..............................а „სას “ა” etus Newtons (N) 
Pounds-force/square inch (рѕ1)............................... 0.06805 ............................ Atmosphere (standard) (atm) 
Pounds-force/square inch (р$1)................................... 2.307. о Feet of water (4?C) 
Pounds-force/square inch (рѕ1)................................... ი. სს" Inches of mercury (0°C) 
Pounds-force/square inch (рѕ1)............................... 6.89476 isse Kilopascals (kPa) 

Quarts (U.S. dry) (dry qt)... ს“ XXV”. Cubic inches (in?) 

Quarts (U.S. liquid) (liq qt) ...................  _-_ DU Mousse eet Cubic inches (in?) 

Quarts: (liquid)... tee eG 0:9463520 csse Liters (L) 

Radians ესა ა--აბ«ოდ”'''''''"''))ს აი Degrees (deg) 

Seconds ა“სთთთსს 4.848137 x10 sss Radians (rads) 

აას асте. анааан 0.404687 სი"!!! Square kilometers (km?) 
Square feet (ft^)... eene D —— € Square inches (in?) 

Square feet (ft^)... sss 0.0929 ............................ Square meters (m?) 

Square სოს პაეეეეი.ა.ა.აა.ა- a E ee EE Square millimeters (mm?) 
Square inches (i2)... 0.000645 ............................ Square meters (m?) 

Square meters (m?) ............ sees 1550... tese Square inches (in?) 

Square miles _-აა----დ--დ 0405 ceret: Acres 

Square miles (mi?) ............. sss 2.589988 ............................ Square kilometers (km?) 
Square millimeters (mm?) ................................ 1.550 x: 10:9 see temen Square inches (in?) 

Square yards (yd?) .......... essere -—— Square feet (ft?) 

Square yards (yd?) ........... sse იაა Square meters (m?) 
Temperature (°С) + 17.28 .......... sse .3-__64 Temperature (?F) 

ის უი.--____ -- __-_ აბას” А Аный Temperature (°С) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


UNIT CONVERSIONS (continued) 


MULTIPLY BY 

Ton-force (tonf) (2000 1ЫР)................................... 8.896443 ............................ 
Ton-force foot (tonfef/ft) ............... sss სს-ს თ” 
Ton-force per square foot (tonf/ft) ........................ 9571605 25 s seta tete 
Ton-force per square inch (tonf/in?) ....................... 13:7895 4 cssc 
Ton (metric); e eee e ed 1000 ......... езунун. 
Tons (long) (2240 165).......................................... 1016:047 ს?” 
Tons (short)... eee aee ees 2000... nens 
(ү ж жин titu OD aiu edens "“”“”“""""!!" 
rio C NEUE საუ“ 
Yards „ს: ”" ს““»'',”"'!სს"" 


SI SYMBOLS AND PREFIXES 


TO OBTAIN 


Kilonewtons (kN) 


USEFUL TABLES 


Kilonewton meters (kNem) 


Kilopascals (kPa) 
Megapascals (MPa) 
Kilograms (kg) 
Kilograms (kg) 
Pounds (165) 


British thermal units per hour (Btus/hour) 


Horsepower (hp) 
Meters (m) 


SI PREFIXES 


MULTIPLICATION FACTOR PREFIX SYMBOL 
1 000 000 000 000 000 000 = E+18 exa E 
1 000 000 000 000 000 = E+15 peta P 
1 000 000 000 000 = E+12 tera T 
1000000000 = | E«09 giga G 
1 000 000 = E+06 mega M 
1 000 = E+03 kilo k 
100 = E402 hecto h 
10 =  E«*01 deka da 
0.1 = Е-01 deci d 
0.01 = E02 centi c 
0.001 = E-03 milli m 
0.000 001 = Е-06 micro u 
0.000 000 001 = E-09 nano n 
0.000 000 000 001 Е Е-12 рісо р 
0.000 000 000 000 001 Е Е-15 femto 
0.000 000 000 000 000 001 = E-18 atto a 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


557 


USEFUL TABLES 


FLOW IN GALLONS PER MINUTE CONVERTED TO FIXTURE UNITS FOR 
GRAVITY FLUSH TANKS AND FLUSHOMETERS 


These tables may be interpolated 


FLOW FIXTURE UNITS FLOW FIXTURE UNITS FLOW FIXTURE UNITS 
GPM | FLUSHVALVE | FLUSHOMETER GPM | FLUSHVALVE | FLUSHOMETER GPM | FLUSHVALVE | FLUSHOMETER 
TANKS VALVES TANKS VALVES TANKS VALVES 

1 0 = 43 99 33 125 506 396 
2 1 = 44 103 39 130 533 430 
3 3 — 45 107 37 135 559 460 
4 4 = 46 111 39 140 585 490 
5 6 — 47 115 42 145 611 521 
6 7 = 48 119 44 150 638 559 
7 8 — 49 123 46 155 665 596 
8 10 — 50 127 48 160 692 631 
9 12 — 51 130 50 165 719 666 
10 13 = 52 135 52 170 748 700 
11 15 — 53 141 54 175 778 739 
12 16 = 54 146 57 180 809 775 
13 18 — 55 151 60 185 840 811 
14 20 = 56 155 63 190 874 850 
15 21 — 57 160 66 200 945 931 
16 23 E 58 165 69 210 1018 1009 
17 24 — 59 170 73 220 1091 1091 
18 26 => 60 175 76 230 1173 1173 
19 28 — 62 185 82 240 1254 1254 
20 30 — 64 195 88 250 1335 1335 
21 32 — 66 205 95 260 1418 1418 
22 34 5 68 215 102 270 1500 1500 
23 36 6 70 225 108 280 1598 1598 
24 39 7 72 236 116 290 1668 1668 
25 42 8 74 245 124 300 1755 1755 
26 44 9 76 254 132 310 1845 1845 
27 46 10 78 264 140 320 1926 1926 
28 49 11 80 275 148 330 2018 2018 
29 51 12 82 284 158 340 2110 2110 
30 54 13 84 294 168 350 2204 2204 
31 56 14 86 305 176 360 2298 2298 
32 58 15 88 315 186 370 2388 2388 
33 60 16 90 325 195 380 2480 2480 
34 63 18 92 337 205 390 2575 2575 
35 66 20 94 348 214 400 2670 2670 
36 69 21 96 359 223 410 2765 2765 
37 74 23 98 370 234 420 2862 2862 
38 78 25 100 380 245 430 2960 2960 
39 83 26 105 406 270 440 3060 3060 
40 86 28 110 431 295 450 3150 3150 
41 90 30 115 455 329 500 3620 3620 
42 95 31 120 479 365 


558 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


AREAS AND CIRCUMFERENCES OF CIRCLES 


USEFUL TABLES 


DIAMETER CIRCUMFERENCE AREA 
Inches mm Inches mm Inches? mm? 
% 6 0.40 10 0.01227 8.0 
V გ 0.79 20 0.04909 31.7 
% 10 1.18 30 0.11045 71.3 
IM 15 1.57 40 0.19635 126.7 
м 20 2.36 60 0.44179 285.0 
1 25 3.14 80 0.7854 506.7 
1% 32 3.93 100 1.2272 791.7 
1% 40 4.71 120 1.7671 1140.1 
2 50 6.28 160 3.1416 2026.8 
21^ 65 7.85 200 4.9087 3166.9 
3 80 9.43 240 7.0686 4560.4 
4 100 12.55 320 12.566 8107.1 
3 125 15.71 400 19.635 12 667.7 
6 150 18.85 480 28.274 18 241.3 
7 175 21.99 560 38.485 24 828.9 
8 200 25.13 640 50.265 32 428.9 
9 225 28.27 720 63.617 41 043.1 
10 250 31.42 800 78.540 50 670.9 


EQUAL PERIPHERIES 


S = 0.7854 D 
D = 1.2732 S 


EQUAL AREAS 


Area of square (S') = 


1.2732 x area of 


Area of square (S) 
0.6366 x area of 

C =pD = 2pR 

C = 3.5446 Varea 


circle 


circle C- 


D = 0.3183 C = 2R 


D = 1.1283 Varea 


Area =pR? = 0.7854 D? 
Area = 0.07958 C? =pD? 
4 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


S = 0.8862 D 
D = 1.1284 S 
S = 0.2821 C 


| 


S 
Y 


559 


USEFUL TABLES 


FRICTION LOSS PER FOOT LENGTH 
[SCHEDULE 80 PVC EXCEEDING CHART A105.1(7)] 


The following formula should be used for where Schedule 80 IPS CPVC sizes 2⁄2” through 10” exceed Chart A 105.1(7): 
Head loss formula: H, = 0.2083 (100/C) 1.852 x О 1.852 / d; 4.8655 
Where: LI, = frictional head loss (feet of water per 100 feet) 
C = Hazen-Williams factor (150 for CPVC) 
Q - flow rate (gal/min) 
d, = inside diameter of pipe (inches) 


Note: head loss in feet of water per 100 feet can be multiplied by 0.4335 to obtain pressure drop in psi 


Velocity formula: Vy = 0.4085 Q/ d? 
Where: Vy = velocity of water (feet per second) 


560 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


USEFUL TABLES 


FLOW IN PARTLY FILLED (ONE-HALF FULL) PIPES 
(BASED ON MANNING'S FORMULA WITH n = .012) 


— For 3/4 Full 
Multiply Qx 1.9 


am TN (S 


[-— „>> I... 8299.40 > 


Nu МР Se ა-ა LC” 
к ს“ TA N\A ბქ ზს) MIX 


LONE Le UN eer 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


SLOPE (feet/feet) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 561 


USEFUL TABLES 


562 


10,000 


9,000 
8,000 
7,000 
6,000 


5,000 


4,000 


3,000 


2,000 


1,000 
900 
800 
700 


600 
500 


400 


300 


200 


100 
90 
80 
70 


60 
50 


40 


30 


20 


0.001 


FLOW IN PARTLY FILLED (FULL) PIPES 
(BASED ON MANNING'S FORMULA WITH n = .012) 


| 


ANI 


Е 


SLOPE (feet/feet) 


AX 


b 


NA 
A 


i 


—Net 


FLOW (gallons per minute) 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


© 2024 International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials. All rights reserved. 


The copyright in this index is separate and distinct from the copyright in the document that it indexes. The licensing provisions 
set forth for the document are not applicable to this index. This index may not be reproduced in whole or in part by any means 


without the express written permission of IAPMO. 


-A- 
ABANDONED 
Grease interceptors ...................... 1014.3.7 
Sewers апа sewage disposal ......... 722.0, H 1101.0 
ACCESS PANELS ...................... 317.1, 402.10 
ACCESS TO 
Appliances ................... 507.25, 508.3, 508.4 


Backwater valves .................. 710.6, 1101.6.4 


1503.2.3, 1503.9.7 


Chemical waste system piping ................ 811.4 
Gleanouts Ri ee M ERTR 707.8, 719.5 
Эйр оршу ny eked UP IIO HUE 1210.71 
Emergency eyewash and 

shower equipment ....................... 416.4 


Flexible connectors 


Рїшһотеїег$............................. 413.2 
Fuel gas meters ................ 1208.7.1, E 402.4.1 
Fuel gas piping................ 1210.3.3.1, 1210.4.4 
Fuel gas pressure regulators ....... 1208.72, 1210.5.1 
Fullway уа\уе$....................... 606.2, 710.6 
Grease interceptors ...................... 1014.3.4 
Indirect waste receptors .................... 804.1 
Interceptors ...................... 1009.3, 1009.5, 
1016.4, H 901.5 

Lapped flanges ....................... 1208.5.11.7 
Manholes ............................. Н 501.12 
Meters апа submeters............. 601.2.1, 601.2.1.1, 
601.2.1.2, L 407.4 

Plumbing їхїшгө$.......................... 402.1 
Pool heaters on/off switch .............. L 503.3.6(1) 


Rainwater storage tanks ....... 1603.4, 1603.5, 1603.6, 
K 105.0, K 105.3.1 

Septic tanks 
Shutoff valves ................ 606.3, 606.6, 1210.9, 
1210.9.1, 1210.9.2, 
1210.9.4, 1212.5.3, 
1212.6, 13272, 


E 403.9, E 403.13(2), 


E 403.13(6) 
Sümps  ო“შ·შ9შ“””“”””'  '' 710.10, 810.3 
Toilet facilities ............................ 422.4 
Trap seal primers ......................... 1007.1 


Valve and Appurtenance Access Door Sign . .1505.9.2 
Vacuum pumps ........................ C 501.2.1 
Valves for 

nonpotable application ................... 1503.9.5 
Vent connectors, fuel gas ................ 509.10.11 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Water meters and submeters ....... 601.2.1, 601.2.1.1, 


601.2.1.2, L 4074 


Water pressure regulators and strainers ........ 608.2 
ACCESSIBLE, DEFINITION .................... 203.0 
ACCESSIBLE, READILY, DEFINITION ............ 203.0 
ACCESSIBLE PLUMBING FACILITIES 

For persons with disabilities ................. 403.2 

Protection against contact ................... 403.3 

Where required ........................... 403.1 
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT, DEFINITION ....... 203.0 


ACRYLONITRILE-BUTADIENE-STYRENE 


(ABS) PIPE ................ 203.0, Table 313.3, 701.2, 
Table 701.2, 705.1 
705.9.4, 903.1, 1101.4, 
1101.4.2.1, 1104.4.2.2 
AIR GAPS 

Backflow prevention. . ... . 603.2, Табе 603.2, 603.3.1, 
Table 603.3.1, 603.4.4 
Definition .—:. sls ee ewe DEPT LP 9I 203.0 

Discharge from drinking 
water treatment units ..................... 611.2 
AIR TANK .................................. 710.11 


ALTERATIONS AND REPAIRS 
Fuel gas piping 


Health care facilities ....................... 1301.5 
Plumbing systems .................. 102.4, 301.2.5 
ALTERNATE MATERIALS, DESIGN, 
AND METHODS ............................ 301.3 
ALTERNATE WATER SOURCE 
Definition -=ით"'"'!ს"""!"""”" ”""'"'"'' 203.0 
For nonpotable applications ...Chapter 15, Chapter 16 
For special water features ................. L 406.1 
Future connections ..................... 1504.9.1 
Identification of piping ..................... 601.3.3 


Nonpotable rainwater 
catchment system 
Potable rainwater 


catchment system ...................... К 102.2 
ANODELESS RISER, DEFINITION ............... 203.0 
APPLIANCES 

Automatically operated............ 509.3.4, 509.5.7.1 


Categorized vent 


diameter/area, definition .................. 203.0 
Connections to building 

fuel gas piping ......................... 1212.0 
DenintlOn «reds CREER 203.0 
Direct-vent................ 206.0, 509.2.6, 509.5.10.1, 


509.8.1, 509.12 


563 


INDEX 


ი-ს. nc. noii eet ER ober bota uei dd 508.4 
Indirect waste type ................... 806.0, 807.0 
In under-floor Spaces ....................... 508.4 
ON TOONS: Aust braune ke cw ep dE 508.0 
Vent Connectors .................. 509.10, 510.2.11 
Venting Of inf sorties Ba ead ea ete 509.0 
APPLICATION FOR PERMIT ................... 104.3 
APPROVED, DEFINITION . ..................... 203.0 
APPROVED TESTING 
AGENCY, DEFINITION ....................... 203.0 
AREA DRAINS ........................ 203.0, 1101.15 
ASBESTOS-CEMENT PIPE ............ Table 510.1.2(5), 
Table 510.2(5) 
ASPIRATORS .................. 203.0, 603.5.9, 1303.5 
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION .. .7.2.0, 1.2.2, 1.3.0, 
1.4.0, 1.5.0, 1.6.0, 
1.70, 1.8.0, 1.9.0, 
1.10.0, 1.11.0, 1.12.0, 
1.13.0, 1.14.0, 
103.0, 203.0 
AUTHORITY TO 
Disconnect gas .......................... 1206.0 
Plumbing system .......................... 106.5 
Render gas service ....................... 1205.0 
AUTOMATIC 
ს-მ” Pe bl Baten К 106.2.4 
Flushometer valves ........................ 413.2 
Pressure relief valve ....................... 608.4 
PUMPS > р 1017.1, 1101.6.2, 
C 501.2.5, LI 601.8 
Seat cover dispensers ...................... 411.3 
Shutoff. sre EL hire Чек Sarat HS 420.3, 504.6 
Siphon, septic tanks ...................... H 601.8 
Sprinkler systems ....................... 603.5.14 
Sumps and receiving tanks .................. 710.9 
Vent dampers, fuel gas ............ 509.14, 509.14.1 
AUTO WASH RACKS ......................... 1011.0 
-B- 
BACKFILLING ............... 314.4, 314.4.1, 1210.1.2.1, 
1323.5.1, 1323.5.4, 1323.5.5, 
1504.72, Н 601.2 
BACKFLOW 
ექეე-.---... ыл ш EE 204.0 
Prevention is ey ore Hd ein 602.2, 602.3 
Prevention devices 
or assembly ............ 603.1, Table 603.2, 603.3 
BACKFLOW CONNECTION ............... 204.0, 603.0 
BACKFLOW PREVENTERS 
Approved standards ................... Table 603.2 
Definition ........... llle 204.0 
For hot water ........................... 603.4.5 


564 


Integral (2.3 eon cena Saws eae 4172, 417.3, 
4174, 603.4.6 
Prohibited locations ...................... 603.4.9 
Protection from damage ................... E 302.6 
Required! аа раар авар) 603.2 
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ............... 602.3, 603.3 
BACK-TO-BACK FIXTURES .................... 704.2 
BACKWATER VALVES 
Definition, о heeds teh teehee 204.0 
Where Required. ............................ 710.6 
ВАШ СОСК .................... Table 603.2, 603.5.2 
BAPTISTRIES ............................... 406.1 
BATHROOM, HALF, DEFINITION ................ 204.0 
BATHROOM GROUP ............. 204.0, 908.2, C 303.0 
BATHTUB, PROHIBITEDTYPE ................. 405.3 
BATHTUBS AND 
WHIRLPOOL BATHTUBS .................... 409.0 
BIDETS: ызыны wee aie ea E 402.5, 410.0 
BLOWOFF CONDENSERS ........... 810.1, Table 810.1 
BOARD OF APPEALS ......................... 1070 
BODY SPRAY, DEFINITION .................... 204.0 
BOILER BLOWOFF 
Пейо Ve eh ILL ecu A ЫЕ н 204.0 
Discharge requirements .................... 810.1 
BONDING JUMPER 
Bonding of CSST fuel gas piping ............. 1211.2 
DefINItION ere EIL et  ""''""''"' 204.0 
BOTTLING ESTABLISHMENTS ................ 1013.0 
BUILDING DRAIN 
Definition: «ti at RE ited Bae od ee 204.0 
სასას”! 102.4.1 
Material. Liebes н ЧА КЫ Table 701.2 
Sizing .................. 703.0, Table 703.2, 710.5, 
C 304.2, Table C 304.2 
ეეხ” """"""""""""ს 712.0 
BUILDING DRAIN (STORM), DEFINITION ......... 204.0 
BUILDING SEWERS 
სსა «sete e oh a ia Re ae 204.0 
EXISTING эшек xe AREE rn T 102.4.1, 715.3 
Location: о TRES AS LIES ame 721.0 
Маїепа!.................. Table 701.2, 715.1, 720.0 
Sizing ............. 710.5, 7170, Table 7171, C 304.2 
Testing reri аа н Ren 723.0 
BUILDING SUPPLY .................. 204.0, Chapter 6 
BURRED ENDS ................. 309.3, 609.1, 701.3.1, 
903.3, 1208.5.7, 1321.72 
“C= 
CAPACITY OF 
Breathing air cylinders .................... F 1001.1 
Graywater systems ...................... 1503.2.1 
Interceptors ............................ 1014.2.1 
Irrigation field and 
mulch basin.......... 1504.2, Table 1504.2, 1504.3 || 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Medical air compressors ............ 1310.3.1, 1311.2 
Rectangular scuppers .................... D 104.0 
Sewage ejectors or pumps .................. 710.3 
Sump pump улузы Алдын жиы eese 1101.6.2 
Water heaters ................... 501.1, Table 501.1(1) 
CAST-IRON PIPE 
Approved standards ...................... 301.2.4 
Discharge line from ejectors ................. 710.4 
Drainage piping ........................... 701.2 
FitlingS- 225 4c lem hac eed 301.2.3, 604.6, 1208.5.9.5 
Flanges "ი"იC;ხოთლ""" ea ita Un reos 1208.5.11.1 
Joining სს"! ””შ””" 705.2, 705.10.1 
Prohibited use .................... 316.1, 1208.5.2 
CAULKED JOINTS .......................... 705.2.1 
CAULKING FERRULES .............. 701.6, Table 701.6 
CERTIFICATION 
Backflow assembly testers ............. 205.0, 603.2 
Medical gas or medical 
vacuum installers ...................... 1323.10 
Medical gas or medical 
vacuum systems ....................... 1306.0 
Pipe welder, definition ...................... 225.0 
Residential fire sprinklers installers ............ 612.1 
CESSPOOL Б шлу рейн и week H 801.1 
Abandoned ....................... 722.0, Н 1101.0 
Connections to sewer prohibited .............. 714.3 
Definition. -–“”“იო”"'""''"'''"'"'"" 205.0 
CHECK VALVES 
In drainage systems ............... 710.4, 710.12.1, 


710.13.2, 1004.2 
In firefighter breathing air 


replenishment systems .................. F 501.7, 
F 601.5.1, F 701.3 
In fuel gas systems ...................... 1208.71 

In medical gas and 
medical vacuum systems ......... 1311.5(2), 1313.5 
In water supply systems .......... Table 603.2, 603.3, 
608.3 
CHEMICAL RESISTANT GLASS PIPE ............ 811.2 
CHEMICAL WASTES ..................... 205.0, 811.0 
მ. ა“ჰჰXX"“-“'””!ს'ს!"'''"''' 509.5 
თ-ს .””'''" RES 509.5.6.2, 509.5.9 
Decorative Shrouds ............ 509.5.1.1, 509.5.4.3 
Definition ............. 00.00 e ee ee 205.0 
EXIStING) eer ea ee 509.5.6, 509.5.6.3 
Factory-built ............................ 509.5.1 
ყა '”“"""""""'!''"'') 509.5.3 
Métal. eese  “ეეუროწ!წსსსსს) 509.5.2 
SIZO osos cete РАТЕ ЕА ЕЕЕ 509.5.5 
ა---–-_--------__--._ 509.5.8 
Тептїпайїоп............................. 509.5.4 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


CHLORINATED POLYVINYL 
CHLORIDE (CPVC) PIPE OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply ........ Table 604.1 
Definition P 205.0 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 

and connections) 
Installation, residential . .................... 604.1.1 


CHLORINATED POLYVINYL 
CHLORIDE/ALUMINUM/CHLORINATED 


POLYVINYL CHLORIDE 
(CPVC-AL-CPVC) PIPE OR TUBING 
Approved standards, water supply ........ Table 604.1 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 
and connections) 
CIRCUIT VENTING ............................ 911.0 
CLARIFIERS .......................... 205.0, 1009.0 
CLEANOUT PLUGS OR CAPS ........... 7074 – 7073, 
707.13, 1107.2 
CLEANOUTS 
AGGeSS^ 2 dh Phi лаа 707.8, 719.5, 801.3.2 
Building ѕемег...................... 310.12, 719.0 || 
Change of direction .................. 707.4, 719.1, 
801.3.2, 803.3, 1002.3 
Clearances ......................... 707.8, 7079 
Condensate drain ........................ 814.3.1 
Соуегр!аїе............................... 707.8 
Direction of flow ...................... 707.5, 719.4 
Horizontal drains ..................... 707.4, 719.1 
"სსე. -””"''""'""  ”” 719.6 
„I.-""''"''"!)! 7074, 7072, 707.12 
Prohibited use ої.......................... 316.1 
SIZO шалын see АЛЛЫН wees 707.1, Table 707.1 
Soil or drainpipes .......................... 317.1 
Where required ................ 707.4, 719.1, 909.1, 
910.6, 1002.3, 1008.1, 
1017.1, 1101.13.1, E 301.4 
CLEARANCE 
თ-ს -. iom e E rese 707.8, 707.9 
Fuel gas vents .......... 509.7.3.4, Table 509.7.3.4(1), 
Table 509.7.3.4(2) 
Water heaters .................... 504.3.1, 504.3.2 
CLEAR WATER WASTE 
Definitlon “ს( ყი ”7? араада 205.0 
Discharge: ძი” 812.1 
CLINICAL SINKS ................. 205.0, 413.1, 1303.7 
CLOSET BENDS ...................... 310.3, 402.6.1 
CLOSET RINGS ............................ 402.6.1 
CLOSET SCREWS .......................... 402.6.2 
CLOTHES WASHER SYSTEM 
Commercial gray water discharge ........ 1503.8.2.3 
დ:,,ს“''”ილლთ"""'"'"!)"''""''! 205.0 


Residential gray water . . . .1503.1.1, 1503.2.2 Exception 


565 


INDEX 


CODE, DEFINITION ............................ 205.0 
COLLECTION CENTERS AND 

ЕАСШШТЕ$...................... 601.6, 725.0, 1010.3 
COMBINATION WASTE AND 

VENT SYSTEMS ............. 205.0, 910.0, Appendix B 
COMBUSTIBLE 

MATERIAL, DEFINITION ..................... 205.0 
COMBUSTIBLE PIPING 

INSTALLATIONS .......................... 1404.0 
COMBUSTION AIR ........................... 506.0 
COMMISSARIES SERVING MOBILE 

FOOD PREPARATION UNITS ................. 422.10 

| “სი "5" ”" 205.0 
COMMON VENT, FUEL GAS ...... 509.6.3, 509.10.2.2, 


509.10.2.3, 509.10.3.1, 
509.10.8.2, 510.2.3, 510.2.9, 
510.2.15, 510.2.16 


COMPLEX SYSTEM ......................... 1503.1.3 
სხს”-Xსსსთ”სსს"''''" 205.0 
COMPRESSION JOINTS ........... 605.7.1.1, 605.10.1.1 
705.2.2, 719.6, 1208.5.10.3 
CONCEALED SLIP JOINTS ................... 402.10 
CONCEALING OF WORK PROHIBITED 
BEFORE INSPECTION ..... 105.1, 105.2.1.1, 105.2.1.2, 
503.2, 1203.2 
CONDENSATE WASTE 
AND CONTROL ...................... 814.0 — 814.6 
CONDENSATE PUMPS ...................... 814.1.1 
CONDENSERS AND SUMPS ................... 810.0 
CONDUCTORS, 
STORMWATER ............. 205.0, 1101.12.1, 1101.13.1, 


1101.16, 1103.0, 1602.6, 

1602.72, 1603.11, K 103.2, 

K 104.5, K 106.4 

CONTAMINATION ................... 205.0, 602.2, 602.3, 
603.1, 811.1, 1321.8.8, 

1321.10.4, 1321.10.7, 

C 302.1, F 1101.8 


CONTINUOUS VENT, DEFINITION ............... 205.0 
CONTINUOUS WASTES 

Definition’ эс ыг дин cutee cia ee RR eo 205.0 

Materials: ;.: i wal Rees 4075, 701.4 

CONTROL VALVES .................... 408.4, 408.10, 

606.5 — 606.7, 1303.1 

COOLING WATER ............................ 808.0 
COPPER OR COPPER ALLOY 

PIPE OR TUBING 

ას. რა” i aa 1208.5.2.3, 1208.5.3.1, 

Table 1215.2(7) – Table 1215.2(13), 

E 403.5 

Joining and connections .................. (see Joints 


and connections) 


566 


Medical gas and 


medical vacuum ......................... 1318.4, 
1319.1, 1323.4.2 
Penetrating framing members .................. 312.9 
Prohibited use of ........... 811.1, 1208.5.2.3, 1208.5.3 
Standard weight. ............................ 302.1 
Underground drainage and vent ................ 903.2 
Water supply ......................... 604.3, 604.4, 
A 105.2, E 302.2.1 
COSMETOLOGY ............................. 422.8 
Drinking ууайет........................... 601.4.3 
Establishments ........................... 422.9 || 
Handwashing Facilities .................... 601.4.2 
Hot-and cold running water ................ 601.4.1 
COVERED MULTIFAMILY 
DWELLINGS, DEFINITION .................... 205.0 
CRITICAL CARE AREA, 
DEFINITION ............................. 205.0 
CRITICAL LEVEL .................. 205.0, Table 603.2, 


603.5.1, 603.5.2, 603.5.5, 
603.5.13, C 501.3 


CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL ............... 603.0 
CROSS-CONNECTION, DISCOVERED....... 1505.14.2.3, || 
1605.3.3 


CROSS-LINKED POLYETHYLENE (PEX) 
PIPING OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply. ....... Table 604.1 
ს-ს MP" eed heir dae eS 218.0 
Flexible соппесїої$....................... 604.13 
“ი. “”“;”"''''!!"""',)ს!! 604.7.2 
Joining and connections................ (see Joints 


and connections) 
CROSS-LINKED POLYETHYLENE-ALUMINUM- 
CROSSLINKED POLYETHYLENE (PEX-AL-PEX) 
PIPING OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply. ....... Table 604.1 
Definitlon ”„""”""'""""""''" Be RE YS 218.0 
Flexible соппесїої$....................... 604.13 
Joining and connections................ (see Joints 
and connections) 
-p- 

DEPARTMENT, DEFINITION ..................... 206.0 
DESIGN FLOOD ELEVATION .............. 206.0, 301.4 

DEVELOPED LENGTH 
Bar and fountain sink trap ................... 801.4 
Definition cc. eerie gh hee eb ae 206.0 
DWV piping ...................... 707.4, 710.13.2 
Indirect waste piping ...................... 801.3.1 
Trap arm vs тарзн 1002.2, Table 1002.2 
Water supply piping .......... 610.9, A 104.4, A 107.2 
Wetvent C 908.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


|| DIALYSIS WATER-DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS ........ 614.0 
DIELECTRIC INSULATORS ..................... 507.1 
DISHWASHING MACHINES .................... 414.0 

Air gap ick а ан НАЕ лыо аЙ 807.3 
Approved standards ....................... 414.1 
Backflow protection ........................ 414.2 
Discharge, drainage........... 414.3, 8073, 1014.3.2 
Drainage discharge, prohibited ........ 419.2, 1014.1.3 
Drainage fixture unit (DFU) ............. Table 702.1 
Energy efficiency ........................ L 403.1 
Flexible connector length . .................. 604.12 

Water supply 
fixture units (WSFU) ..... Table 610.3, Table A 103.1, 
Table C 303.2 

DISINFECTED TERTIARY RECYCLED 
WATER 

I Detinition ==“ 206.0 

DISPOSAL FIELDS 
Construction ............................ 1504.5 
ს” ა ros esur arie ipie reee ს 206.0 
Groundwater ............................ 1504.4 
“წმი “ი''58ე"'"'),))ს)ს)სს 1504.5.3 
Private sewage system ................ Appendix H 
Valvedzones ............................ 1504.1 


DOMESTIC HOT-WATER DISTRIBUTION 
WATER SYSTEMS FOR HEALTH FACILITIES 


AND CLINICS .............................. 613.0 
DOSINGTANKS ............................ H 601.8 
DRAINAGE SYSTEM 

Cleanouts --–===»'''' pev 707.0, 719.0 
Change in direction ........................ 706.0 
Damage to public sewer or private 
sewage disposal system ............. 305.1, 714.0 
Definition «2:2. cm bk xxi ees 206.0 
Fixture units 2 CC" Table 702.1 
II ი უსა. ოსსს!”““““უ'"''"'! 1010.5.1 
Independent systems ....................... 311.0 
Indirect waste ......................... Chapter 8 
Joints and connections ..................... 705.0 
Materials ................. 701.2, Table 701.2, 715.0 
Obstruction of fIOW ......................... 310.5 
II Piping (OSHPD) .......................... 310.9 
SIZING» .................. 702.0, Table 702.1, 703.0, 
Table 703.2, 717.0, Table 717.1 
Slope of piping ........................... 708.1 
Sumps and ејесіогѕ ........................ 710.0 
165160521 ასრ Deer иу EY EA 712.0, 723.0 
Waste detrimental to ............ 306.0, 811.1, 1012.1 
DRINKING FOUNTAINS ................. 206.0, 415.0, 
809.0, E 501.8 
DUCTILE IRON PIPE ............... Table 604.1, 605.4 
DURHAM SYSTEM, DEFINITION ................ 206.0 
ay Ес 
EARTHQUAKE-ACTUATED GAS 
SHUTOFF VALVES .......................... 12118 


EFFECTIVE GROUND-FAULT 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


CURRENT PATH, DEFINITION................. 207.0 
EFFECTIVE OPENING ............. 207.0, Table 603.3.1 
C)CCI0ს8§........................... 710.2 – 710.5, 

710.9 – 710.12 
EMERGENCY EYEWASH AND 

SHOWER EQUIPMENT ...................... 416.0 
EMERGENCY SANITARY DRAINAGE .............. 7270 
ENFORCING AGENCY, DEFINITION ............... 207.0 
ESSENTIAL PLUMBING PROVISIONS . . ........... 321.0 
EXCAVATIONS ................. 314.0, 1203.2, 1504.4, 

H 301.1, H 701.4 
EXCESSIVE WATER PRESSURE ................ 608.2 
EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION 
OF PIPE, PROVISION FOR ................... 312.2 
EXPANSION TANKS ..................... 608.2, 608.3 
=P= 
F RATING ............... 208.0, 1404.3, 1405.3, 1406.4 
FAUCETS 
Approved standards .......... 4174, 4174, L 402.5.1 
Common and Public Use Area.............. 4072.3 || 
KilGhen: eos uode sacks shat 420.2.1, 420.2.2 
Maximum flow гаїе@................... 4072, 420.2, 
L 402.4, L 402.5 
Metering. ................. 4072.4, 4072.4.1, 4074, || 
Table L 402.1, L 402.5.2 
Public Lavatory .......................... 4072.1 || 
Residential kitchen ................ 420.2.2, L 402.4 
Residential Lavatory. ...................... 4072.2 || 
ოღჰვიი ალია თათით თოთი 407.4 
Separate controls for hot and cold water........ 4175 
Sink faucets: ””ს>»”"”'”',ს'უ'შ 420.2 
Temperature limitation........... 407.3, 408.4, 409.4, 
410.3, 416.2 
With pull out spouts ........................ 417.4 
FIRE SPRINKLERS, RESIDENTIAL .............. 612.0 
FIREFIGHTER BREATHING AIR 

REPLENISHMENT SYSTEMS ............ Appendix F 

FITTINGS 
Branch... sve "“ი”შჟჟ”"ჟჟუზნძ“”” 419.2 
თი-სა-ო:––?3–““”“”"“"""''”' 707.1, 7072 
Dielectric i2 oui а аад 605.15, 605.16.1, 


605.16.3, 705.10.2, 
1322.6.1, E 403.8.2 
Drainage system ........... Table 701.2, 701.3, 705.0, 
706.0, E 504.3 
Firefighter breathing air 


replenishment systems .................. F 801.3 
სახის - 2.4 seis LIED VERE 402.9, 403.2, 417.0, 
603.5.20, L 402.0 

Fuel gas piping ................ 1208.5.4, 1208.5.9, 
1208.5.10, 1210.4.1 

Fuel gas уепї.................. 509.3.6(2), 509.4.2, 


510.2.8, 510.2.9 


567 


INDEX 


Gray water ............................ 1503.9.2 
Inlet, for fixture connections ............ 704.1, 704.2 
Lead content ...................... 604.2, 604.2.1 


Material of .................... 604.0, Table 604.1, 
Table 701.2, 701.3, 903.0, 
1208.5, 1208.5.9, 1208.5.9.5 

Medical gas 


and medical vacuum 


Plumbing vent =. ""'""' 903.0 
Prohibited... cire ce de RR S 310.1 
SCrewed у oss ns Aes Roe ma dU Set 310.8 
Water supply system ............ 604.0, Table 604.1, 


605.0, A 107.3 


„სის. (see Plumbing fixtures) 
Branch, definition ......................... 208.0 
Calculations ............................ 422.1.1 
Connections „"“”””” ыкдал Кыа ы eee 704.0 
Drain, definition ........................... 208.0 
Flanged connection ........................ 402.6 
Future installations ........................ 402.11 
ჩყიხიშ.................. (see Plumbing fixtures) 
Units, drainage (DFU) ........... 702.1, Table 702.1, 

C 303.1, Table C 303.3 

Units, water supply (WSFU)....... 610.3, Table 610.3, 
610.10, Table 610.10, 

A 103.1, Table A 103.1, 

C 303.1, Table C 303.2 

FLAGPOLING OF VENTS ...................... 906.3 

FLAMMABLE VAPOR ОВ FUMES ........... 208.0, 507.12 

FLASHING ......................... 701.5, 906.5, 906.6, 


1102.3, K 103.1.1 
FLOOD RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 


Coastal high hazard area ............. 205.0, 301.4.1 
Design flood elevation ...................... 206.0 
Flood hazard area ......................... 208.0 
Flood hazard resistance ..................... 301.4 
FLOOD-LEVEL RIM .................... 208.0, 801.3.2 
FLOODED, DEFINITION ....................... 208.0 
FLOOR DRAINS ............................. 418.0 


Connected into a trap 
Directly connected to 


drainage system ........................ 1007.1 
LOCATION - «eleg pat eed 418.3, 418.4, 1017.1 
Required ............... 408.8, 704.3, 1017.1, E 501.6 

FLUSH TANKS ................... 208.0, 402.4, 413.1, 

413.3, 413.5, 601.2 
FLUSH VALVES, DEFINITION ................... 208.0 
FLUSHOMETERTANKS ................. 208.0, 411.2, 


413.1, 603.5.3 

FLUSHOMETER VALVES ...... 208.0, 413.1, 413.2, 601.2, 
603.5.1, 610.10, 

Table 610.10, L 402.2.2 


568 


ERUX... va гиз etna Ыы ered 604.1, 604.2, 605.1.1, 

605.1.4, 705.3.1, 705.3.3, 

1321.9, 1321.9.2, 1321.11.1 

FOG DISPOSAL SYSTEMS .............. 208.0, 1015.0 

FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, DEFINITION ............- 208.0 
FOOD-HANDLING EQUIPMENT 

AND FIXTURES 

FOOD WASTE DISPOSER ............... 419.0, 714.4, 

1001.2, 1014.1.3 

FREEZE PROTECTION ................... 312.6, 603.4.7, 

603.5.7, 608.2, 1005.1 

1210.1.4, 1210.71, 1323.2, 

1503.9.4, 1603.16, K 106.0 


FROST OR SNOW CLOSURE ................... 906.7 
FUEL GAS PIPING ....................... Chapter 12 
Cathodic protection ........... E 403.8.1 – E 403.8.4 
Change in direction ....................... 1210.6 
Concealed location ....................... 1210.4 
Detection of leakS ........................ 1213.4 
Electrical bonding and grounding ............. 1211.0 
Inspection and testing............... 1203.0, 1213.0 
Installation ........... llle 1210.0 
Interconnections ......................... 1208.2 
Joints апа fittings ......................... 1208.5.4, 
1208.5.10 – 1208.5.11.4, 

1213.2.1, 1213.2.2 

»->V“+–-–-”'""""" !"!"'''""" 1208.5 
Obstruction of flow ....................... 1210.10 
Рига: sime КАД wees eek ena ERE 1213.6 
SIZING ართ!!!” 1208.4, 1214.0, 1215.0, 
Table 1215.2(1) — Table 1215.2(36), 

E 403.3 

Supports ................ 1210.3.5, Table 1210.3.5.1 


Underground installation ...... 1208.5.2.3, 1208.5.3.4, 
1210.1, E 401.2, 


E 403.7, E 403.8.4 


FUEL GAS VENTS 

Appliances not requiring vents .............. 509.2.1 
Caps iuis орин) 509.6.1(6), 509.7.4(3) 
Clearance: S c и AE atat 509.7.3.4, 
Table 509.73.4(1), 

Table 509.7.3.4(2) 

Daimpets: «ceres bv x HERE PEERS 509.13, 509.14, 
509.14.1 

Direct-vent ..........0.000 0c eee eee 509.2.6 
General requirements ...................... 509.0 
Insulation shield ........................ 509.6.1.1 
Integral а а "”')ს)ს 509.2.7 
შა "''"""'"''"'""' 509.1 
Mechanical draft ................ 509.3.3, 509.3.3.4 
Obstruction of ЙОМ... ..................... 509.15 
Plastic piping ........................... 509.4.1 
Special 2 «deese ted Leder enc nf 509.4.3 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Termination ................ 509.6.1, 509.72, 509.8 
Wall penetrations .......................... 509.8 
FUEL GAS VENT, SIZING 

Category | appliances.............. 509.6.2.1, 510.0 
Multiple appliances ........................ 510.2, 
Table 510.2(1) — Табе 510.2(9) 

Multistory ..................... 509.6.3, 509.6.3.2, 
510.2.13 — 510.2.16 

Single appliance ........... 509.7.4(1)(b), 509.10.2.1, 


510.1, 510.12, 
Table 510.1.2(1) — Table 510.1.2(6) 


FUTURE CONNECTIONS .................... 1504.9.1 
-G- 
GANG OR GROUP SHOWERS ....... 209.0, 408.4, 408.8 
GARBAGE GRINDER ......... (see Food waste disposer) 
GRADE 
Building sewer ............................ 718.1 
Définitlonr 4 5 араара rS 209.0 
Horizontal drainage ........................ 708.0 
GRAVITY DRAINAGE REQUIRED ............... 709.0 
GRAYWATER, DEFINITION . ..................... 209.0 
GRAY WATER SYSTEMS 
Alternate water sources ................... 601.3.3 
Alternate water source testing, inspection, 
and maintenance frequency ........... Table 1501.5 
Components: «tose ene eed Bees 1503.9 
Daily discharge ........................ 1503. 8.3 
Definition. „аа н ааа рна 209.0 
Gray water systems ....................... 1503.0 
Inspection and testing ..................... 1502.0 
Operation and maintenance manual .......... 1501.6 
GREASE INTERCEPTORS ...... 1014.0, 1014.1B, 1014.1C 
Approved standards ....................... 1014.1 
ს „““”””"'"'!!"'""!' 209.0 
Capacity .................. 1014.2.1, Table 1014.2.1 
Gravity-type ................. 1014.3, Table 1014.3.6 
Hydromechanical-type ..................... 1014.2 
Not гедией............................ 1014.1.3 
Required .................. 1010.1, 1014.1, H 101.3 
GRINDER PUMPS ........................... 710.12 
GROUNDWATER, DEFINITION ................... 209.0 
-H- 
HANDHELD SHOWERS ........................ 4173 
HANDWASHING FIXTURE 
Definition элейт R3 ERR 210.0 
НАМСЕН$........................... (see Supports) 
HARMFULWASTES .................... (see Wastes, 
detrimental or harmful) 
HEALTH AND SAFETY ................... 101.3, 102.5 
HEALTH FACILITIES AND CLINICS, 
WATER DISTRIBUTION ...................... 613.0 
HEAT EXCHANGERS ....................... 505.4.1, 


603.5.4, C 302.0 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


HEAT-FUSION JOINTS ................. 212.0, 605.6.1, 
605.11.1, 1208.5.10.2 
HORIZONTAL BRANCH, 


DEFINITION ............................. 210.0 
HORIZONTAL PIPE, 
DEFINITION ............................. 210.0 
HORIZONTAL-TO-HORIZONTAL 
DRAINAGE FITTINGS ....................... 706.3 
HORIZONTAL-TO-VERTICAL 
DRAINAGE FITTINGS ....................... 706.2 
HORSE MEAT AND PET FOOD 
ESTABLISHMENTS .................... 601.8, 1010.4 || 
HOT-MOPPED SHOWER PANS ...... (see Shower, pans) 
HOT WATER SUPPLY PIPING ............. 601.2, 609.1, 


609.4, 609.12, 
610.3, 610.12.1, 
L 501.0, L 502.0, L 503.0 


HOUSE DRAINS .................. (see Building drain) 
HOUSE SEWERS................. (see Building sewer) 
zz 

IDENTIFICATION 
Cast-iron soil pipe ......................... 701.2 
Copper tubing ............................ 604.4 
Fuel gas piping ......................... 1208.75 
Medical gas and 
medical vacuum systems .................. 1318.5, 


1323.13 — 1323.13.3, 
1323.14, 1323.15 


Piping, fittings, traps, and fixtures .............. 301.2.1 
Potable and nonpotable water lines ........... 615.0 
Water, nonpotable and potable ............... 601.3 
INCREASERS AND REDUCERS ................ 316.0 
INDIRECT-FIRED WATER HEATERS ........ 211.0, 505.4, 
603.5.4, 608.7 

INDIRECT WASTE ........................ Chapter 8 
Air gap or break ........................... 801.2 
Appliances)... tsa cased Soe a ag fe YEAS 807.0 
Approval required ......................... 802.0 
Aspirators ....................... 603.5.9, 1303.5 
Chemical wastes .......................... 811.0 
Clearnouts:: ааа у аа ele 801.3.2, 803.3 
Clear water wastes ........................ 812.0 
Condensate .................. 814.1, 814.1.1, 814.5 
Food handling fixtures ..................... 801.3.3 
High temperature discharge ................. 810.1 
Interceptors nm "'შ""შ"'""""""" 902.1 
Receptors .......................... 801.4, 804.0 
Sterile equipment ............ 801.6, 806.0, 1303.4.1 
Swimming pools .......................... 813.0 
гаре Geese et hee: 801.3.2, 803.3, 814.5 
Vents «4 eio жй РАККА МЫ ЕЗ anes 803.3 
Where required ........................... 801.2 
INDIVIDUAL VENTS ........... 211.0, Table 703.2, 904.1, 
908.2. 1 


569 


INDEX 


INDUSTRIAL WASTES 
ACCOSS is RU AE RE ERA dade e 811.4 
Approval required .......................... 811.1 
ხი: აა «ics e кш Ree RR eae ae eS 211.0 
Disposal! sn ee ны 306.0, 811.7 
Маїепаз..................... 811.2, 811.3, 903.2.2 
Pretreatment required ................. 306.1, 811.1 
Prohibited material .................. 811.1, 903.2.2 
Vents. hostes in esed e MP rd 811.6 
INSANITARY 
Defective ѕуѕїете ........................ 105.3.1 
Detinitlon екы eee Es ate ee 211.0 
Health and safety ......................... 102.5 
INSPECTION AND TESTING .................... 105.0 
Alternative engineering design ..... 301.3.1 — 301.3. 1.2, 
301.5.6 
II Сгозз-Соппесїїоп...................... 1505.14.2 
ი-ს" 105.2 
„ია -'”””””' ”'""'"ს) ხ”!ს 1505.14.2.4 
| Reclaimed (Recycled) Water . . .1505.14, Table 1505.16 
Reinspection ............................ 105.2.6 
Required .............. 105.1, 105.2, 1203.0, 1213.1, 
1321.12, 1324.0, 1406.0, 1501.5, 
ТаЫе 1501.5, 1502.0, 1601.5, 
Table 1601.5, 1605.0 
საა .·“““”ი”"''''''' 105.2, 1203.3.1 
Scheduling of ........................... 105.2.3 
II Supply System ........................ 1505.14.1 
ს-“,“'”შშ"'""!"!!"!' 105.3 
I Visual System ....................... 1505.14.2.1 
INSPECTOR ........... (see Authority Having Jurisdiction) 
INSULATION 
I Domestic hot water supply . . .609.12, 609.12.3, L 501.2 
Fuel gas vent .......................... 509.6.1.1 
Penetrating firestop system........... 1404.5, 1405.7 
Pool coverS ........................... L 503.3.6 
Service hot water ...................... L 503.3.3 
Tracer Wi .................... 604.10.1, Е 403.8.4 


INTERCEPTING HOPPERS OR SINKS . . .(see Receptors) 
INTERCEPTOR (CLARIFIER) 


Abandoned ............................ 1014.3.7 
Auto wash racks .......................... 1011.0 
Bottling establishments .................... 1013.0 
Cleanouts, location ........................ 7077 
Commercial and industrial laundries .......... 1012.0 
Definition ა” """"""""""'”'' 211.0 
агеаѕег: EET IRI V EIS PS 1014.0 
Industrial: zuo do dee EU bes 1009.0 
Oil and flammable liquid .................... 1017.0 
Packing establishments .................... 1010.0 
Sand: eur ecd d ete ee ee s 4 1016.0 
Slaughterhouses ......................... 1010.0 
–––––>>2ნო-“-“”“ი”''. 902.1 
INTERMIXING OF 
METALS PROHIBITED ................. 310.6, 604.1 
570 


INVERT, DEFINITION .......................... 211.0 
IRON PIPE SIZE (IPS) PIPE .................... 302.0 

IRRIGATION FIELD 
Construction: «xar teh he ere EY Re 1504.5 
სს ს  აოა«–ნანთ»„,სსსსს)!"'" 211.0 
Gray water systems .............. 1504.5 — 1504.5.1 
Groundwater ............................ 1504.4 
Material MEE 1504.5.2 
Size. «loot ike 1504.2, Table 1504.2, 1504.3 
foie RE Table 1504.2 
Subsoil construction ................ Table 1504.5.3 
Valved ZONES. ........................... 1504.1 
ISLAND FIXTURE, VENTING ................... 909.0 

A lo 
JOINTS AND 

CONNECTIONS ................ 315.0, 605.0, 705.0, 
1208.5.10 — 1208.5.12.5, 
1320.0 
–-__.. 705.1 
Asbestos cement pipe ............. Table 510.1.2(5), 
Table 510.2(5) 
Brazed joint ........... 212.0, 605.1.1, 609.3, 705.3.1, 


705.10.1, 705.10.2, 1208.5.10.1, 
1208.5.10.2, 1309.4, 1321.1 


Cast-iron piping ..................... 604.6, 701.2, 

705.2, 705.10.1 
Caulked }оїпї............................ 705.2.1 
Compression joint ....... 605.6.2, 605.7.1, 605.10.1.1, 


605.11.2, 705.2.2, 1208.5.10.3 
Copper or copper 


alloy pipe or tubing ................ 605.1, 705.3, 
705.10.1, 705.10.2 

CPVC piping ааа аараан 605.2 
CPVC-AL-CPVC piping ог tubing ............. 605.3 
Ductile iron piping ......................... 605.4 
Expansion joint ............ 705.9.2, 1101.5, 1213.2.2 
Flared ses ahve iva enero ecd 605.1.2, 1208.5.9.4 
Galvanized steel pipe ................. 605.5, 705.4 
Ground joints ........................... 705.9.3 
Heat-fusion joints .................. 212.0, 605.6.1, 
605.11.1, 1208.5.10.2 

Lead content ............................. 604.2 
Mechanical joints .......... 605.1.3, 605.2.1, 605.4.1, 


605.5.1, 605.6.2, 605.8.1, 
605.9.2, 605.10.1, 605.11.2, 
605.12.1, 605.13.1, 605.16.3, 
705.1.1, 705.2.2, 705.3.2, 
705.4.1, 705.6.1, 705.7.1, 
705.8.1, 705.10.4, 1208.5.10.3 


PE pipe or tubing.................. 605.6, 1208.5.4 
PE-AL-PE pipe or tubing .................... 605.7 
PERT tübing «vere he aS 605.8 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


PEXAUDING: ათ”!!! 605.9 

PEX-AL-PEX pipe or tubing................. 605.10 

Plastic piping, joints, and fittings ..... 605.2 — 605.3.2.1, 

605.6 — 605.12.3, 

705.1.1 — 705.1.3, 

705.5 — 705.5.1.3, 

705.6 — 705.6.3, 

705.10.3, 1208.5.10, 

1210.1.7.1 

PP! PIPING? peux Ree I SERRE 605.11 
Prohibited fittings 

and practices ................ 310.0, 315.2, 604.2, 

1321.8.4, 1321.12.3, 1322.7 

PVC piping ................. 605.12, 705.6, 705.9.4 

Screwed joint ...................... 310.8, 701.3.1 

Slip JOINT: i eer edhe eee 221.0, 402.10, 

605.14, 705.9.1, 1003.2 

Soldered joint ........ 212.0, 605.1.4, 705.3.3, A 1073 


Solvent cement plastic pipe ......... 605.2.2, 605.3.1, 
605.12.2, 705.1.2, 

705.6.2, 705.9.4 

Stainless steel pipe ............... 605.13, 605.16.3, 
705.7, 705.10.4 

MUS 605.1.5, 605.2.3, 605.52, 
605.11.3, 605.12.3, 605.16.1, 

705.1.3, 705.3.4, 705.4.2, 705.6.3, 
705.10.2, 1208.5.8, 1208.5.9.1, 
1208.5.9.5, 1322.5, A 1073 

Tightness: DC —————— m 105.3 


Threaded joint 


Transition joint .......................... 705.9.4 
Various materials ......... 605.16, 705.10, 1210.1.3.8 
Vitrified сїау.............................. 705.8 
Welded joint .............. 212.0, 605.13.2, 705.7.2, 
1208.5.9.1, 1322.1, F 1101.2 
== 
LABEEED: 22а о WEE 214.0, 301.2 
LAUNDRY SINKS ............................ 1001.2 
LAVATORIES ................ 407.0, 422.9, Table 702.1, 
1503.8.2.1, E 501.4 
LAVATORIES INSETS .............. 214.0, Table 702.1 
LAVATORY 
Definition: c.a var E 214.0 
LAVATORY FAUCETS 
Common and public use агеаз.............. 4072.3 
Maximum flow rate ................. 4072.1, 4072.2 
Metering їТаисеї.......................... 4072.4 
PUblIG: +з. EM REG oe ed Lei ses 4072.1 
Residential ............................. 4072.2 
LAWN SPRINKLERS ......... Table 610.3, Table A 103.1, 
A 103.2, M 102.5 
LEAD 
Allowable lead contents .............. 604.2, 604.2.1 
Bends and traps ..................... 701.5, 906.6 
Closet rings zo iit EIER Rex REEL 402.6.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


Flashing  '“""""“”' 1102.3.1 
სახა ა აა. ?.''""''' 1102.1 
Slieet:. cc ო. Bain dees pea kee 408.8.3, 701.5, 906.6 
Water supply ...................... 604.2, 604.2.1 
LEADERS 

თ--სას .'”'””""'"'"'"' M"" 1101.13 
Definition ys cf vy een раар Ya 214.0 
Installed outside ......................... 1101.4.3 
Leaders, conductors, and connections ........ 1101.16 
Roof drainage ........................... 1101.12 
Size of leaders, conductors, and 

storm drains ........................... 1103.0 
Sizing roof drains, leaders, and 

vertical rainwater piping ............. Table 1103.1 
Traps on storm drains and leaders ........... 1101.15 

LIMITED-DENSITY OWNER-BUILT 
RURAL DWELLING 

Connections to plumbing system.............. 304.1 
Definition... sz eee ae ” ЫЗ 214.0 
Disposal of liquid waste ..................... 303.1 
Water supply and flushing ................... 601.2 


LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM 
GAS (LP-GAS) ............... 214.0, 1202.1, 1208.4.1, 
1208.5.6.3, 1208.5.10.4, 
1212.11, E 401.2, 
E 403.1, E 403.10 


LIQUID WASTES ................. 214.0, 303.0, L 302.0 

ს–_იიიიი. 214.0, 301.2, 402.6.2, 

501.1 

LISTING AGENCY ....................... 214.0, 301.2 
LOCATION OF 

Backwater valves ......... 710.1, 710.3, 710.4, 710.6, 


1006.0, 1101.6.4, 1503.2.3, 
1503.9.1, 1503.9.7 


Fixtures £3145i225epeD4S4425ELLISNFMSS ES 308.0, 402.0 

Fuel gas meters ................. 1208.7 — 1208.73, 

E 402.4 - E 402.4.2 

Fuel gas valves ................. 1210.9 – 1210.9.4, 

1212.5.3, 1212.6, Е 402.3 

Interceptors апа separators ............ 1009.3, 1009.5 
Medical gas and 

medical vacuum system valves ............ 1314.0 

Plumbing system or sewer on lot ........ 307.0, 721.1, 

Table 721.1 

Private sewage disposal system ............. H 101.8 


Water heaters .......... 504.1, 504.3 — 504.6, 506.3, 
507.2, 507.5, 507.10, 
507.12 — 507.15, 507.24, 


507.25, 507.26 


LOT, DEFINITION ............................. 214.0 
LOW HAZARD ..................... 214.0, Table 603.2 
LOW VOC CEMENT, DEFINITION ...............-. 214.0 
LOW VOC ONE-STEP 

CEMENT, DEFINITION ....................... 214.0 
LOW VOC PRIMER, DEFINITION . ................ 214.0 


571 


INDEX 


-M- 
MACERATING TOILET SYSTEMS ......... 215.0, 710.13 
MAIN, DEFINITION ........................... 215.0 
MAINTENANCE .......... 102.2, 102.3, 1009.6, 1014.1.2, 
1501.5, Table 1501.5, 1501.6, 
1504.6.4, 1504.11, 1505.16, 
| Table 1505.16, 1601.5, Table 1601.5, 


1601.5.1, K 101.5, K 101.5.1, 
Table K 104.3.3, L 501.5, 


L 504.2 
MALLEABLE IRON ......... 604.7, Table 604.1, Table 701.2 
MANUFACTURED/MOBILE 
HOME PARKS AND 
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS ........ Appendix E 
MARKINGS ....................... (see Identification) 
MATERIALS 
Alternate eese pP AER Y 301.3, H 501.13 
Approval required .......................... 301.2 
Approved standards ...................... 301.2.2 
Backwater, gate, or ball valves ............... 710.6 
Building drains ....................... Table 701.2 
Building sewers ............ Table 701.2, 715.1, 720.0 
CeS8p00ls:... 4 ix ree f RUE nde H 801.0 
Cleanouts  '“"“C”"(“C '"'''!"""'""""!სს' 707.1 
Drainage piping, joints, 
and fittings ................... 701.2, Table 701.2, 
701.3, 705.0 


Fuel gas piping, joints, 
and fittings .................... 1208.5, 1208.5.1, 
1208.5.3 — 1208.5.4, 
1208.5.9, 1208.5.10, 1208.5.11 


Marking ОЇ.............................. 301.2.1 
Medical gas and medical vacuum ............ 1318.0 
Potable water piping, 
joints, and fittings .................... 604.0, 605.0 
II Rainwater catchment system ...... 1602.7, Appendix K 
Septic tanks ............................ H 501.3 
Storm drainage pipe ....................... 1101.4 
Subsoil drain ........................... 1101.4.6 
Sumps or receiving tanks ................... 710.8 
uc aD ECL 1003.1 
Vents (DWV) ................... Table 701.2, 903.0 
MAY, DEFINITION ............................ 215.0 
MEAT AND POULTRY 
| PROCESSING PLANTS . ........... 601.5, 724.0, 1010.2 
MEAT PACKING AND SLAUGHTERHOUSES ..... 1010.0 
MEDICAL GAS AND MEDICAL 
VACUUM SYSTEMS .................... Chapter 13 
Alatms: eue tis Ur ER АЛЫ Кайр RR MEER 1324.4 
სა ას : cod uico wee Ot PEE AE ums 1303.5 
Category 1 iio os nc eins ERE NL eei 205.0 
Category 2s cce "'უ'"'"'"''"'' 205.0 
Саїедогу:З ............................... 205.0 
Category 4... dud REA RE кур d 205.0 
Cleaning: жу иел кышы RR eS Gs 1318.2 
572 


Construction documents ................... 1304.3 
Definitions ==" "'' 215.0 
Health Care Facilities (OSHPD) ............ 1304.1.1 || 
Installation requirements ............ 1304.0, 1323.0 
Joints and connections .................... 1320.0 
Labeling and identification ................. 1323.13 
Material: «uses feed cers kale Pe ШУ 1318.0 
Medical air systems ....................... 1312.0 
Medical vacuum ѕуѕїетѕ ................... 1319.0 
ყი. ჰ--““სი"”")"""!""”"'"' 1323.1, 
Table 1323.1.4(1) – Table 1323.1.4(6) 
Pressure-regulating equipment ..... 1308.0, 1321.10.2 
Shutoff valves ........................... 1318.1 
აია. “ნნ” 1304.1.2 II 
Station outlets/inlets ...................... 1905.3, 
1314.10, 1315.0 
Sterilizers and bedpan steamers ............. 1303.4 
System certification ....................... 1306.0 
Testing and inspection ..................... 1324.0 
Warning system .......................... 13170 
METALS, INTERMIXING PROHIBITED ...... 310.6, 604.1 
METER, DEFINITION .......................... 215.0 
METERING FAUCETS ........... 4072.4, 407.2.4.1, 41712 
MID-STORY GUIDE, DEFINITION ................ 215.0 
MINIMUM STANDARDS ........................ 301.2 
MINIMUM PLUMBING 
FACILITIES .................. Table 422.1, Table 4-2, 
Table 4-3, Table 4-4 
MULCH, DEFINITION ......................... 215.0 
MULCH BASIN 
Construction 22.05 26-2066 peek Pea ee eid. 1504.5 
Definition: Pm 215.0 
Gray water systems ................ 1504.5 — 1504.5.1 
Groundwater .............................. 1504.4 
Maltértial v ki Be ae a ek ра 1504.5.1 
е а е 1504.2, Табе 1504.2, 1504.3 
sie E Table 1504.2 
-N- 
NATURAL GAS, SPECIFIC GRAVITY ............ 1214.1 
NITROGEN NF, DEFINITION .................... 216.0 


NONCOMBUSTIBLE PIPING INSTALLATIONS . . . .1405.0 
NONPOTABLE WATER 


Alternate water source ................. Chapter 15 
Disinfection ....... llle 1506. 10.6 11 
Identification .............................. 601.3 
Rainwater catchment system ............ Chapter 16 
Unlawful connections to ........... 603.5.11, E 502.3 
NONWATER SUPPLIED URINAL, 
DEFINITION ............................... 216.0 
NONWATER URINALS 
Drain cleansing action............. 412.1.4, 412.1.4.1 
Requirements ................... 412.13, L 402.3.1 | 
NUISANCE ............................ 102.5, 216.0 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


-o- 
OBSTRUCTIONS 
OF FLOW... oir db eR ee ed 310.5, 315.2 
II OCCUPANT LOAD FACTOR (BSC, DSA) ........ Table 4-1 
OFFSETS 
Definition o аа bag Ae ee E es 217.0 
Drainage .............. 706.4, С 304.3.1, С 304.3.2, 
С 304.4, С 401.4, С 601.7 
Medical gaS ............................. 1320.2 
Prohibited use ........................... 402.6.3 
Venting (fuel gas) ............... 509.6.2.2, 510.1.2, 
510.2.4, 510.2.16 
Venting (plumbing) ........................ 910.5 
OIL AND FLAMMABLE INTERCEPTORS ......... 1017.0 
ONE- AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS ............. 301.7 
ON-SITE TREATED NONPOTABLE 
WATER SYSTEMS 
Definition, ызны TER et ЫРЫ 217.0 
Minimum water quality requirements .......... 1501.7 
Operation and maintenance manual .......... 1501.6 
Signage 'წა>>ჯჟშ"!'""'"""""" 601.3.3 
ON-SITE TREATED NONPOTABLE 
GRAY WATER SYSTEMS ...................... 1506.0 
Color and marking information .............. 1506.8 
Connections to other systems ............... 1503.3 
Devices and <узїет<...................... 1506.7 
Disinfection ........ illie 1506. 10.6 
ა--I-.->–-”"""”""'"'"!" 1506.6 
Minimum water quality requirements .......... 1501.7 
Operation and maintenance manual .......... 1501.6 
Signage ................. 601.3.3, 1501.9 – 1501.9.2, 
1506.0 – 1506.3 
System changes ......................... 1506.3 
BERE 1501.1.1 
OPEN TRENCH WORK ........................ 314.3 
OPENING, EFFECTIVE, 
DEFINITION: ғ.а dn bed клы Se tee es 207.0 
WOSHPD 1R _.................................. 301.8 
OVERFLOWS ....... 404.2, 413.5, 607.5, 1603.9, 1603.9.1 
-p- 
PATIENT CARE SPACE, DEFINITION ............. 218.0 
PENALTIES: ripis LT ELLE 106.0 
PENETRATION 
FIRESTOP SYSTEMS ........... 218.0, 1404.3, 1405.3 
PERCOLATIONTESTS ................ 1504.3, H 401.0 
PERMITS, REQUIRED ............. 104.1, 502.1, 1501.3, 
1601.3, E 101.2, E 302.7, 
H 101.9, K 101.3 
PERMITS FEES .................... 104.5, Table 104.5 
PIPING 
ABS and PVC, residential ........ 701.2(2)(a), 903.1.1, 
II 1101.4, 1101.4.2.1 
Drainage, changes in direction ............... 706.0 
Drainage, existing sewers ................... 715.3 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


Drainage, horizontal slope ............. 708.0, 718.1 
Drainage, material ....701.2, Table 701.2, 715.1, 720.1 
Exposed to sunlight, 

ABS and PVC .......................... 906.1 
Fuel gás: i22 lee Res 1208.0, 1210.0 
Hangers and supports . . .313.0, Table 313.3, 1210.3.5, 

1210.3.5.1, Table 1210.3.5.1, 
1323.4 — 1323.4.5 
Table 1323.1.4(1) – Table 1323.4.4 


Identification ......... llle 601.3 
Indirect waste ............................ 803.0 
Insulation: sensu lE pA 609.12.3 || 
Joints and connections ...(see Joints and connections) 
Location (ОЅНРР”) ........................ 310.11 |l 
Medical gas, таїепа|...................... 1318.0 
Plumbing vent, material ........... Table 701.2, 903.0 
Protection of ........................ 312.0, 718.3, 
1210.1.3 — 1210.1.5 
Rehabilitation of .......................... 320.0 
Separation in trenches ................... 1505.11 
Sprinkler system, lawn .......... Table 610.3, 612.1, 
Table A 103.1, A 103.2, M 102.5 
Storm drainage, materials .......... 1101.4 — 1101.4.6 
Trenching, excavation, 
and backfill...............0 002000 Ыгы: 314.0 
Underground .................... 314.4.1, 1210.1.6 
Water supply, material............ 604.0, Table 604.1 
PITS, SEEPAGE .................. 221.0, 714.3, 716.1, 
722.2 — 722.4, Appendix H 
PLUGS, CAPS, CLEANOUT ............... 707.1, 7072 
PLUMBING 
Additions, alterations, 
renovations or repairs .................... 102.4 
Appliances .............. 218.0, 304.1, 310.5, 313.1, 


417.2, 603.4.6, 606.5, Table 610.3, 
Table 702.1, 801.7, 803.3, 806.1, 
807.0, 808.1, Table A 103.1, L 302.2 
Appurtenances ......... 218.0, 304.1, 313.1, 603.4.6, 
Table 610.3, Table 702.1, 814.2.1, 
1505.9.2, 1505.11, 1506.10.3, II 
1602.9, Table A 103.1, L 501.2 
Connected to sewer or 


private disposal systems ...... 304.1, 713.1, L 302.2 
ს-ე), ახ.” кыже УЫ шк лт ытыыр Е ЛЫМ 218.0 
Inspection of ............................. 105.0 
Official ........... (see Authority Having Jurisdiction) 
Plumbing equipment schedules .............. 323.0 
System, definition ......................... 218.0 
TOSIS ч steer men ener ee p 105.3, 105.3.1 
Uncovered for inspection .................. 105.2.1 
Vent, definition ......... 0... 2. cc ee eee eee 218.0 
Vent system, definition ...................... 218.0 

PLUMBING FIXTURES 
ACCESS eee ld EXE ს”"”'''''''' 402.1, 413.2, 
416.4, 422.4 


573 


INDEX 


Accessibility ............. 403.1, 403.2, 408.6, 408.7 
Alternate materials ................... 301.3, 406.3 
Approved standards ............ 301.2.1, 301.2.2, 408.1, 


409.1, 410.1, 411.1, 412.1, 
415.1, 416.1, 4171 — 4174, 


418.1, 420.1 
Back-to-back ............................. 704.2 
Below curb or sewer level .............. 710.1, 710.2 
Clearance from wall, toilet, urinal ............. 402.5 
Connections, drainage .......... 304.1, 406.1, 408.5, 


409.2, 415.3, 416.5, 
419.2, 420.4, 704.0 


Control valves ..... 408.4, 408.9, 601.2, 606.5 — 606.7, 

1303.1, 1505.8, 1506.10 
–იიიიიიიიიიიიიიიი 218.0 
Distance from traps ...... 1001.2, 1002.2, Table 1002.2 
Fixture units ................... 610.3, Table 610.4, 


610.7 — 610.10, Table 610.10, 
702.0, Table 702.1, Table 702.2, 
703.0, Table 703.2, Table A 103.1, 
Table C 303.2, Table C 303.3, 

C 501.4, C 501.5 

Floor drains ............. 408.8, 414.3, 418.0, 704.3, 
801.3.2, 1003.1, 1006.0, 1007.1, 
1014.3.2, 1016.1, 1017.1, 1101.11, 
1505.1, 1506.1, 1602.1, B 101.5, 

B 101.6.1, Table C 304.2, 

Table C 304.3, E 501.6 


Improper location of ....................... 308.0 
Indirect wastes ........................... 804.1 
Installation of ............ 402.0, 405.3, 408.4, 408.8, 


409.3, 409.6, 412.1.1, 
413.1 — 413.3, 413.5, 
415.4, 416.3, 418.3 


Islarids;: = ctu. лаа а аА Lb vd 909.0 
ЈО a ertet xe tota ГКК 402.2 
Material of .............. 401.0, 406.2 — 406.4, 408.8 
Minimum number ......................... 422.0 
Must be connected to sewer............ 304.1, 713.1 
Must be provided with trap .................. 1001.2 
ი-“–.უ-'"""""' 404.0 
Prohibited ..................... 310.5, 405.0, 910.7 
Quality: 24 "ს 401.2 
Settings «eec EH ERATIS be ten 402.5, 402.6 
Size of waste for .......... 702.0, Table 702.1, 703.0, 
Table 703.2 

Special fixtures ........................... 406.0 
Strainers and connections ............. 407.5, 408.5 
Supply fittings ............................ 402.7 
Waste connections ........ 407.5, 408.5, 409.2, 415.3, 
416.5, 419.2, 420.4 

Water supply required ...................... 601.2 
POLLUTION ............ 218.0, 603.1, Table 603.2, 714.5 


574 


POLYVINYL CHLORIDE (PVC) 
PIPE OR TUBING 
Approved standards, 


water supply and DWV ..... Table 604.1, Table 701.2 
იუ, „ა„”ლ”ღა””''''''"!!" 218.0 
Exposed to sunlight ........................ 906.1 
Flexible tubing for whirlpool bathtubs ......... 409.6.2 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 

and connections) 
Lining for shower receptors .................. 408.8 
Roof агаіп .............................. 1102.1 


POLYETHYLENE (РЕ) PIPE OR TUBING 
Approved standards, 


water supply and DWV .............. Table 604.1, 
Table 701.2 

Définition: sese ''"''''ე""'"')!" 218.0 
ი. ..=-““ო“”'"'"'"'"""'''' 1208.5.4, 


Table 1215.2(19) — Table 1215.2(23), 
Table 1215.2(34) — Table 1215.2(36) 


Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 
and connections) 
Roof drains ,>კ?,სსთოსა””"""”""! 1102.1 


POLYETHYLENE-ALUMINUM-POLYETHYLENE 
(PE-AL-PE) PIPE OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply ........ Table 604.1 
Déefinitlon cr ae alert MESE 218.0 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 


and connections) 
POLYETHYLENE OF RAISED 
TEMPERATURE (PE-RT) PIPE OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply ........ Table 604.1 
ს-სიითნთ“"'შჰ·" ie bee ed RS 218.0 
Flexible connectors ....................... 604.13 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 


and connections) 
POLYPROPYLENE (PP) PIPE OR TUBING 


Approved standards, water supply ........ Table 604.1 
Chemical waste ........................... 811.2 
სას,” 218.0 
Joining and connections ................ (see Joints 

and connections) 
Roof'drains პას ას на аин а арЫ 1102.1 


POLYVINYLIDENE FLUORIDE (PVDF) 
PIPE OR TUBING 


Chemical waste ........................... 811.2 
Definition. =... “""”"”შ”ჟ“”რ!“'“რ“რუჟ“”ჟ”ჟ”თ”თრი EET 218.0 
POTABLE RAINWATER 
CATCHMENT SYSTEMS ................ Appendix K 
POTABLE WATER 
Connections .............. 603.4.4, 603.5.6, 603.5.7, 


603.5.10 — 603.5.12, 
603.5.14, 603.5.21, 
801.5, 1303.5 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Definition... iiim alee OE RE AE 218.0 
Devices or assemblies ..................... 603.2 
Disinfection ............................. 609.10 
Protection from 
heat transfer medium ............ 505.4.1, C 302.2 
Healing even E 501.1, L 507.0 
Identification с. ""'" "'““ кшз 601.3 
Joints and fittings ............... 604.2, 604.6, 605.0 
Materials ...................... 604.1, Table 604.1 
Outlets zov Ee suelto rM LE 603.5.17 
Protection of ........................ 602.0, 603.0 
Sizing piping ................... 610.0, Аррепаіх А, 
Appendix C, Appendix M 
Supply required .................... 601.2, E 302.1 
TANKS 02 ise d eR а cubus eee sets s 607.0 
Unlawful connection to ........ 602.0, 603.5.11, 1503.3, 
1505.4, 1506.4, 1602.4, 
E 502.3, K 102.2 
MC - EE 606.0 
PRE-RINSE SPRAY VALVES ............. 420.3, L 201.0 
PRESSED FITTINGS ................. 605.1.3, 605.1.3.2, 


605.13.1, 605.16.1, 705.71 
PRESSURE DRAINAGE 


CONNECTIONS ............................ 805.0 
PRESSURE, EXCESSIVE, WATER ............... 608.2 
PRESSURE-LOCK-TYPE 

CONNECTION, DEFINITION .................. 218.0 
PRESSURE LOSSES, WATER .................. 610.2 
PRESSURE REGULATORS 

Firefighter breathing air 
replenishment systems .................. F 501.8 


Fuel gaS ............. 507.20, 507.21, 1202.1, 1208.7, 
1210.9, 1215.1.3 
Medical gas and 


medical vacuum ...................... 1321.10.2 
ს--„აას””"'"'"'"””"''"!""!' 608.2 
PRESSURE-RELIEF VALVES 
Definitlom «noon ELUENRIIREBP RS 224.0 
Differential, 
backflow prevention........... 603.3.7, Table 603.2 
Discharge: X”'7!'!''”""""""'" 608.5 
Firefighter breathing 
air replenishment systems ............... F 501.1, 
F 501.8, F 701.3 
Medical gas and medical vacuum ..... 1308.2, 1308.3, 
1310.4, 1316.1 
Water Heaters ................. 504.4, 504.6, 505.2 
Water Supply ............... 608.2 — 608.4, E 302.5 
PRIMARY SETTLING TANKS ................... 902.1 
II PRIVACY COMPARTMENT, DEFINITION ........... 218.0 
PRIVATE OR PRIVATE USE, DEFINITION ......... 218.0 
PRIVATE SEWAGE 
Capacity of system.......... H 101.7, H 201.0, H 701.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


””მ”!?წჭვნძმვნ,””!)ევ')ს LI 501.3, LI 601.9, 
LI 701.3, LI 801.3 


Design ................. H 101.6, H 501.2, H 501.11, 

H 901.4, H 901.7 

Disposal systems .......... 218.0, 713.2, Appendix H 

General requirements ..................... H 101.2 

(ა. -.-·„ლლCლCთCთთ»„"ს"”''” "'" 105.0 

Location ............... 721.0, H 101.8, Table LI 101.8 

PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY ......... 602.2, 602.4, E 302.1 
PROHIBITED 

Appliances erc cie eed RR was 310.5 


Concealed gas piping ........... 1210.4.2, 1212.3.1, 


1212.5.3, 1323.6 


Concealment of Чеїесї$..................... 309.2 

Concealment of work 
before inspection .................. 105.0, 503.2, 
1203.0, 1406.1 

Connections 

емек aho rA ine ac шал ae 714.3 
Waste .................. 310.3, 404.2, 603.4.4, 
805.1, 807.3, 810.1 
Watér ................. 602.0, 603.4.4, Е 502.3 


Copper tubing, use of 
Damage to drainage system 


xu donors 903.2.2, 1208.5.3.3 
gres 305.1, 312.3, 312.6 


DEVICES а dise and artes adque 310.5, 1210.10 
Direct drainage .................... 603.4.4, 805.1, 
807.3, 810.1 
Discharge ................ 509.1.2, 714.2, 1603.3.2, 
K 104.2 
FILINGS: oos i a e en 310.0, 315.2, 604.2 
სს x acer eee VEGA e v 310.5, 405.0 
Food waste disposal, 
იიიეი-ა-”ა»””ს:თ””"''"M" 1014.1.3 
Fuel gas piping................ 1208.5.3.3, 1210.3.4 
Industrial waste disposal .................... 306.2 
Installations ........................ 312.2, 602.1 
Joints and connections ....... 315.2, 605.1.4, 605.6.2, 


1321.12.3, 1322.7 
Locations ................. 415.4, 1210.3.4, 1503.6 
Materials ............... F 801.4, H 501.10, H 501.13, 
K 103.1.1, L 503.1.1 

Medical gas and 


medical vacuum piping ................. 1323.3.1 
OXVOCN dca bse крда калык бы at 1213.16 
Pipes in concrete or masonry ................ 312.2 
Practices .............. 102.4.1, 104.1, 106.0, 303.1, 


305.1, 309.2, 310.0, 312.2, 
312.6, 502.1, 602.0, 714.1, 
1101.3, 1204.3, 1205.0, 1206.3, 
1501.3, K 101.3, L 302.1 


Receptors, location of ...................... 804.1 
დ-ს აასს" ЛОК ТО Г СУР 310.4 
Traps: zzi bk iM priae НМЕ 1004.0 


INDEX 


Trough type urinals ................. 405.2, E 501.5 
Urinals and water closets on a 
combination waste and vent system ......... 910.7 
Vent termination .......................... 906.3 
Water piping .................. 312.6, 604.2, 720.1 
PROPERTY LINE, TERMINATION OF VENT ....... 906.2 
PROTECTION FROM 
Corrosion ............. 312.1, 312.4, 402.3, 402.6.2, 


402.6.3, 506.9, 507.5, 508.1.2, 
509.5.3, 509.7, 509.10.1, 
509.10.1.2, 509.10.1.3, 603.5.14.1, 
603.5.14.2, 609.3, 710.4, 

710.8, 810.2, 811.2, 814.1, 

1004.1, 1208.5.3.4, 1208.6.1.1, 
1210.1.3, 1210.3, 1210.4.5, 1310.4, 
1323.2, 1323.3, 1503.9.1, C 501.3, 
E 301.3.2, E 403.5, E 403.6, 

E 403.8.2, E 403.8.4, E 502.7, 

F 501.4, H 501.3, H 501.13, 

K 105.2, K 106.2.2 


Decay: xh tet 1503.9.1, H 501.3, K 105.2 
Freezing .................. 312.6, 603.4.7, 1210.1.4, 
1210.7.1, 1603.16 
SEISMIC 3 es eae ee a нЕ 507.2, 1323.4.5 
PROTECTION OF 
Animals and їпзесїз..................... 1503.9.3 
Fuel gas meters ................ 1208.6.1, 1208.6.3 
Piping materials and structures .............. 312.0, 
314.4, 1210.1 
Potable water supply ....................... 603.0 
Тар seals .................. 1002.0, 1005.1, 10070 
Water heaters ..................... 504.3 — 504.6, 
505.2, 507.2, 
507.12 — 507.15 
PSYCHIATRIC SERVICES ...................... 322.0 
PUBLIC OR PUBLIC USE, DEFINITION ........... 218.0 
PUBLIC SEWER, DEFINITION .................. 218.0 
PUBLIC SHOWER FLOORS .................... 408.8 
PUSH FIT FITTINGS ................... 218.0, 605.1.3, 
605.1.3.3, 605.2.1 
-Q- 
QUALITY AND WEIGHT OF MATERIALS, 
GENERAL REGULATIONS ........... 301.2.1, 301.2.2, 
301.3, 301.5 
QUALITY OF FIXTURES ....................... 401.2 
QUICK-DISCONNECT DEVICE, DEFINITION ...... 219.0 
cR 
RAINWATER 
ს-ს სთ” 220.0 
II „””””””” 1603.4.1 
RAINWATER CATCHMENT 
SYSTEMS: copes daen ERES Rr een 220.0, 601.3.3, 
Chapter 16, Appendix K 
576 


RAINWATER DIVERSION 


ს "--ს””"!ს"”"”'““”“შ”'""'"' 1603.20 || 
RAINWATER STORAGE TANK, 
DEFINITION ............................... 220.0 
REAMING PIPES .............. 309.3, 605.1.1 — 605.1.2, 
605.1.3.2, 605.1.3.3, 
605.1.4, 609.1, 
701.3.1, 705.3.1, 
705.3.3, 903.3 
RECEIVING LANDSCAPE, DEFINITION ........... 220.0 
RECEIVING TANKS ОВ SUMPS ........... 710.2, 710.3, 
710.7 — 710.10, 
710.13.1 
RECEPTORS 
სუს ა.ო“ის–ს””''"'"'"!"!"""!"" 220.0 
Indirect waste ....................... 414.3, 801.2, 


801.3.2, 801.3.3, 
801.5, 801.6, 801.7, 


804.0, 807.1, 
810.4, 814.5, 
902.2, 1303.4.1 
Shower ..................... 408.1, 408.5 — 408.8 
RECLAIMED (RECYCLED) 
WATER... uS АА КЬ А) 220.0, Il 
601.3.3, 1505.0 
RECYCLED WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS ........... 1505.0 || 
Allowed ....................... 1505. 1.1, 1505. 1.2 
Color and тагкїпд........................ 1505.8 || 
სკ,“ ""''"'''"!!"! 220.0 
In бийаїпдз....................... 1505.0, 1505.1 
Inspection & testing ...................... 1505.14 
Maintenance and inspection . . .1505.16, Table 1505.16 
Minimum water quality requirements ........ 1505.14 
უნ, ა. .-–'–'ა–”""'''""''''"''!""" 1505.12 
Structures allowed for toilet and 
urinal flushing ........................ 1505.1.2 
REDUCED PRESSURE DETECTOR FIRE 
PROTECTION BACKFLOW 
ASSEMBLY ............ Table 603.2, 603.3.9, 603.5.14 
REDUCERS 2:2: ERI foie eid 316.0 
REFRIGERATORS ............................ 801.3 
REGULATORS 
Backpressure ............................. 507.9 
Draft: ”""'!)Mს"!" 506.1.2, 509.12.3 – 509.12.5, 
509.15 
Firefighter breathing air .................... F 501.8 
Fuel gas supply ............ 507.20 — 507.22, 1202.1, 


1208.2, 1208.7 — 1208.11, 

1213.1.5, 1214.1, 1215.1.3, 

E 404.0, E 404.4, E 404.5.2 

Medical gas and medical vacuum ...1308.3, 1321.10.2 
Water supply ............................. 608.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


RELIEF VENTS ................... 907.0, 911.3, B 101.4 
Coriniections: >ш cs test ek eroi ge 805.1 
Definition мз ык ыы Ыра Кы Г pale he 220.0 
Interceptors ............................. 1009.4 

REMOTE OUTLET, DEFINITION ................. 220.0 

ВЕМОЕВЕН$................................. 601.7 

REPAIRING 
Defective gas pipe, prohibited ............. 1208.5.7 

REPAIRS AND ALTERATIONS TO 

PLUMBING AND DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ........ 102.4 

REQUIRED 
Air gaps or air breaks ....................... 801.2 
Appurtenances ................ 1505.11, 1506.10.3, 

1602.9 

Area of subsurface irrigation 
fields and mulch basins .................. 1504.2 
Drainage or sewer connections ......... 304.1, 713.0 
PINGS i ter Etre Ae eee 1506.10.5, 1603.18 
Flushing devices .......................... 413.1 
Fuel gas pipe size ........................ 1215.0 
Fuel gas supply .......................... 1214.0 
Gravity drainage .......................... 709.0 
Hot and cold water ....................... 601.2.1 
Inspections ..................... 1406.0, 1502.3.4, 
1605.3.4 
Low-pressure cutoff ........................ 609.9 

Medical gas and 

medical vacuum pipe size ................ 1323.1 
Рей аа р mudo e АЙ 104.0 
Plans fils PADRE ЫН RR E 103.3 
Plumbing fixtures ............... 422.0, Table 422.1 
Teste. svp bee end 1502.2 — 1502.3.4, 1504.10, 
1505.6, 1506.6, 1602.5 
Vents: 22.5458 xPERGEER "''"'” 901.2 

RESPONSIBLE FORTESTING ................ 105.2.5 

RESTAURANT, GREASE INTERCEPTORS ....... 1014.1 

HETESTING cbr eu ао produ 105.3.2 

RISERS 
Fuel gaS ............... 1208.5.6, 1210.1.7, 1210.4.4, 


Е 403.6, Е 404.3 
Medical gas and 


medical vacuum ............... 1323.3, 1323.13.3 
Sewer ы Sateen eee E 504.6, E 504.6.2 
Water essi Sage hee 220.0, 408.11, 610.1, 


1502.3.3, A 103.1, A 106.1, 
A 106.2, A 108.1, E 302.1, 
E 302.4, E 503.2, 

E 505.4, L 503.3.7 

|| RODENTPROOFING ................. 312.12, 1503.9.3 
ROOF DRAINS .............. 220.0, 1101.12.1, 1101.12.2, 
1101.15, 1102.0, Table 1103.1, 

1106.3, 1107.2.1, K 105.12 

ROOF DRAINAGE ................ 1101.12, Appendix D 
Combined ......................... 1101.12.2.2.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


Controlled-flow ........................... 1105.0 
Primary: = ee eee ee 1101.12.1 
Secondary ............................ 1101.12.2 
Separate piping ..................... 1101.12.2.2.1 
ROOF GUTTERS .................... 1101.12.1, 1103.3, 


Table 1103.3, 1602.6, 1602.72, 
1603.14, 1603.19, K 103.2, 
K 105.12, K 106.3 
ROOF, TERMINATION OF 


VENTS ABOVE ............... 509.6.1, 905.4, 906.1, 
906.3, 906.5, 906.7 
ROOFWASHERS ..................... 220.0, K 106.2 
ROUGHING-IN, DEFINITION .................... 220.0 
E 
SADDLE, SLEEVE, BAND OUTLETS, 

PROHIBITED .............................. 310.1 
SAFETY AND HEALTH ........................ 102.5 
SAFETY DEVICES .......... 504.4 — 504.6, 505.2, 608.0 
SAND INTERCEPTORS ....................... 1016.0 

Cleanoutfor ил: “““'““ს"""!""" ur 707.7 
Construction and size ..................... 1016.3 
Definition: «c алар ee ee 221.0 
DESIGN vested Rhea aa eee SYS 1009.3 
Discharge ......................... 1009.7, 1016.1 
EEOC ATION PR MC" 1009.5 
Maintenance ............................ 1009.6 
Required ......................... 1009.1, 1016.1 
Vent, required and 
not required ............... 902.1, 1002.1, 1016.4 
Water seals ....................... 1009.3, 1016.4 
SANITARY TEES, 
PERMISSIBLE USE ................. 706.2, C 601.3, 
C 601.4 
SCREW JOINTS ...................... 1205.2, 1206.3 
SCRUB SINK, DEFINITION ...................... 221.0 
SDR, DEFINITION ............................ 221.0 
SEAL, TRAP ................. 222.0, 315.1, 412.1.1, 413.4, 


901.3, 912.2, 1005.0, 
1007.0, E 501.6 


SEAM, WELDED, DEFINITION .................. 221.0 
SECONDARY INTERCEPTORS ................. 902.1 
SECONDARY TEMPERATURE 
LIMITING DEVICE .......................... 505.2 
SEDIMENT TRAPS ................... 1210.7.2, 1212.9 
SEEPAGE PITS -'”'''"''""""" H 701.0 
რ-ს --”””"''"'"'" 722.2 
Area of disposal ......................... H 301.0 
Capacity: |: еа ааа H 701.1 
Combination with disposal fields ............ H 601.4 
Connection to sewer prohibited ............... 714.3 
Construction ............................ H 701.3 
Definition n д КЫЫ Bb eee ds we RES 221.0 


577 


INDEX 


Location............... 721.0, H 101.8, Table H 101.8 
Markings T 716.1 
Multiple installations ...................... H 701.2 
Soil absorption ............ Table H 201.1(2), H 301.1 
SELF-CLEANING TRAPS ..................... 1003.1 
SEPARATE PLUMBING AND 
DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ....................... 311.0 
SEPARATE VENTING .................... 811.6, 906.3 
SEPARATORS .............................. 1009.0 
SEPTIC TANKS 
Abandoned .............................. 722.2 
Capacity .................. H 201.0, Table H 201.1(1) 
Connections ............................ H 601.7 
Connections to sewer prohibited .............. 714.3 
Construction ............................ H 501.0 
Definitlon: nece vier rasta 221.0 
Location of .................. LI 101.8, Table LI 101.8 
Markings- EE 716.1 
ს-|-'”""სს""'"!!' LI 501.8 
SERVICE, AUTHORITY TO RENDER GAS ........ 1205.0 
|| SERVICES/SYSTEMS AND UTILITIES ............. 310.14 
SETTING FIXTURES .......................... 402.5 
SETTLING TANKS ............................ 902.1 
SEWAGE 
ს-“!”“”'''""'''!""'" 221.0 
Disposal of.............. 303.0, 709.0, 713.0, 714.0, 
II 1014.1, 1010.5.2, 1503.2, E 301.1, 
E 504.1, L 302.1 
SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
SYSTEMS, PRIVATE .............. 1010.5.2, Appendix H 
Abandoned... eg шашыла хан 722.2 
Commercial food waste grinders .............. 714.4 
Design: ore "!!"'!"!"!""''' H 101.6 
Holding'tank: cire pene eae eee: 714.5 
Inspection апа testing .................... Н 1001.0 
Location x а m ke A UE 307.0, 721.0, 
H 101.8, Table H 101.8 
წXV--I--ს””"''"'''"! 715.0 
'"წ-).--სი,!""'!!'""”'! ი 904.1 
SEWAGE EJECTOR ......... 221.0, 710.2, 710.3, 710.10 
SEWAGE PUMP ............. 221.0, 710.2, 710.3, 710.13 
SEWERS ჰაასსს" ач арЫ Chapter 7 
Abandoned .............................. 722.0 
Adjacent to walls ..... 312.3, 715.1, 718.3, Table 721.1 
Available ........................... 713.2, 713.4 
Building, definition ......................... 204.0 
Building, material of ......... 701.0, Table 701.2, 715.0 
Cleanoüts. თოოCნX ,'''""'" eia runs 719.0 
Connection to, required ............... 304.0, 713.0 
Construction of ..................... 715.0 – 719.0 
Damageto ..................... 305.1, 306.1, 714.1, 
718.3, 811.1, 1009.1 
Depth of аА 312.3, 718.3, 720.1 
578 


Easements for ............................ 721.2 
Ejeciots: «xt er IPSE 710.2, 710.3, 710.10 
Existing –თ-”””!!'"" 102.4.1, 713.6, 715.3 
Grade and support of ................. 708.0, 718.0 
Gray маїег..................... 1503.0 — 1503.9.7 
Independent system required ................. 311.0 
Inspections ა ““პ""ს!ს!სსსსს""""""" 105.0 
Joints and connections ..................... 705.0 
ს --იილ-"""''''"'"" 307.0, 312.3, 718.3, 

720.0, 721.0, Table 721.1 
Materials ...................... 701.0, Table 701.2, 


715.0, 720.1 
Mobile home and 


recreational vehicle parks ......... E 301.0, E 504.0 
Must be on same lot as building ......... 307.1, 721.1 
Private sewage disposal systems ........ 713.0, 714.0 
Prohibited connections ............... 603.4.4, 714.2, 

714.3, E 502.7 
Reclaimed (recycled) water ................ 1505.12 Il 
ს-ას ა--ა–-–“ს““”''"'"!"წ''” 709.1, 713.0 
Size of building ................ Table 702.1, 703.2, 


Table 703.2, 710.5, 
717.0, Table 717.1, C 304.2, 
Table C 304.2, C 601.9 


Storm water ..................... 1101.3, 1101.16.2 
SUDDOLE 4:3: ბუდედ ბბ პი eit аа 718.2 
Testing Of cose E id RD ESDRE SES 723.0 
Vem S 00 е P DE 904.1 
Water pipe in trench .................. 609.2, 720.0 
SHALL, DEFINITION .......................... 221.0 
SHEET LEAD ........................ 408.8, 408.8.3, 
701.5, 906.6 
SHIELDED COUPLINGS ...... 221.0, Table 313.3, 705.2.2 
SHOCK ARRESTER, DEFINITION ............... 221.0 
SHORT TURN '4 BEND, PROHIBITED ...... 310.5, 706.0 
SHOULD, DEFINITION . ........................ 221.0 
SHOWERS 
Approved standards ....................... 408.1 
Control valves ....................... 408.4, 601.2 
Discharge, gray water .................. 1503.8.2.2 || 
Finished curb or threshold ................... 408.6 
Gag: ას" 209.0, 408.4.1, 408.4.2, 


L 201.0, L 402.6.1 
Mobile home and recreational 


vehicle parks .......................... E 501.7 
Multiple showerheads serving 
one shower ...i..lls ale b 408.3.2 | 
–_?/““იიიიიიიიიიჩ'''' 408.8 
„ა სა. ააა“"''''"' 408.9 
Receptors ..................... 408.6, 408.7, 408.8 
Single showerhead ...................... 408.3.1 || 
Stall or сотрагпїтепї....................... 408.7 
Tests uev RIEN VIII 408.8.5 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Valve and head location ................... 408.10 

იეწიწწრწეეეეეგ” 417.2, 417.3 

Waste outlet or drains ................. 317.1, 408.5 

Water consumption ................. 408.3, L 402.6 
SHUTOFF VALVES 

Fuel gaS ................. 507.8, 509.5.7.1, 1208.12, 


1210.3.3.1, 1210.8.2, 1210.11, 
1212.3.1, 1212.3.2, 1212.5.3, 
1212.6, 1212.7, 1212.9, 
1213.2.5, 1213.6.1.4, E 402.3, 
E 402.4.2, E 403.0, E 403.9, 
E 403.13, E 404.5 

Medical gas and 
medical vacuum ............... 1310.3.2, 1312.2, 
1314.6, 1314.7, 1314.8, 
1314.11, 13272 
Ѕемаде....................... 710.12.1, 710.13.2 
Water. onse RR hs 504.6, 606.2, 606.3, 
608.4, 609.9, E 302.3, 
L 402.3.1, L 404.6, 
L 410.3, L 413.4 


SIGNAGE ........................... 1501.9, 1505.13 
Access аоог........................... 1505.9.2 
Commercial, industrial, institutional, 

and residential ......... 1501.9.7, 1505. 13.1, 1604.2 
Equipment room ......... 1501.9.2, 1505. 13.3, 1604.3 
Tank type toilet ........................ 1505.13.2 

SIMPLE SYSTEM 
Clothes washer ......................... 1503.1.2 
Detinition. ses е Уа  ”"” , 'ორჩძღზჰზ ძჰჭლჰძჟ"”'"'' 221.0 

SINGLE-STACK VENT SYSTEMS .............. C 601.0 

SINKS “” "!""!'“"“V”„_შ_შშ_ ge Yl 420.0 
Approved standards ....................... 420.1 
თს..." диш a 205.0, 413.1, 1303.7 
ТООГО Они 421.0, В 101.2 
Islànd ЕЕЕ Rus 909.1 
Laündty «si tear ae fede aet 420.4 
Prohibited types .................... 405.3, B 101.2 
SOVICE ыта Аб ores о ON ea es о vas 420.4 
Special use .............................. 406.2 
Three-compartment ....................... 1001.2 

SIZE OF 
Building sewers ............ 703.2, 717.0, Table 717.1 
Сеѕѕрооіѕ .......................... Appendix Н 
CHIMNEY Si n Ae и 509.5.5 
Circuit муепїїпд............................. 911.0 


Combination waste 


and vent piping ................. 910.0, Appendix B 
Combustion air openings ............. 506.3 — 506.5 
Condensate pipe ................ 814.3, Table 814.3 
Disposal fields ....................... Appendix H 
Drainage piping ................ Table 702.1, 703.0, 


Table 703.2, C 304.0, 
E 302.2, E 504.4 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


FOG disposal systems ..................... 1015.3 
Fuel gas piping systems ...... 1208.3, 1214.0, 1215.0, 
E 403.2, Table E 403.2 

Fuel gas vents ................... 509.6.2, 509.74, 
509.10.2, 510.0 

Flushometer valves and tanks ......... 610.10, 610.11 
Gray маїег.............................. 1503.8 
Grease interceptors ......... 1014.2.1, Table 1014.2.1, 
1014.3.6, Table 1014.3.6 

Hanger rods .............................. 313.6 
Indirect waste pipes ................. 801.3.1, 803.3 


Leaders, conductors, 
andstorm drains ........... 1103.0, Table 1103.1, 


Table 1103.2, Table 1103.3 


Louvers, grilles, and screens ................. 506.8 
Medical gas and medical vacuum pipe ....... 1323.1.1 
Mulch basins .......................... 1504.5.1 
Oiltanks ы лиз ышын вы cece eee Е 403.12 
Pipe cleanouts ................. Table 707.1, 707.10 
Rainwater catchment systems ........ 1602.6, K 106.5 
Reclaimed (recycled) 

water piping ........................... 1502.6 
Roof drainage................ 1101.12, Table 1103.2, 


Table 1103.3, 1105.1, 
1603.15, Appendix D, K 106.4 


Sand interceptors ......................... 1016.3 
Seepage pits and disposal fields ............ H 301.0 
Septic tanks ............................ H 201.0 
Single-stack vent systems ................. C 601.0 
Subsoil irrigation field piping ................ 1504.7 
--__ 702.1, Table 702.1, 910.4, 

1003.3, 1006.1, 1101.15.2 
Vacuum drainage systems ................ C 501.2.1 
Vent pipes .............. Table 703.2, 710.10, 810.1, 


Table 810.1, 904.0, 908.1.1, 

908.1.2, 908.2.2, C 401.0 

Water heaters ................. 501.1, Table 501.1(1) 
Water piping ......... 610.0, Table 610.3, Table 610.4, 
Table A 103.1, Appendix A, 

Appendix C, E 302.2, Appendix M 


Water softener connections .................. 611.4 
Wet venting .............................. 908.0 
SLAUGHTERHOUSES ........................ 1010.0 
SLIP JOINTS ......................... 221.0, 402.10, 
509.10.10, 605.14, 

705.9.1, 705.9.3, 1003.2 

SLOPE 4  ”"""""'"""''"")!" (see Grade) 
SOIL PIPE ................ 221.0, 310.2, 310.4, 402.6.1, 
Table 701.2, 701.2(6), 

722.2, 1002.4 

SOIL POROSITY ............................ H 101.2 


INDEX 


SOLDER, BUSHINGS ................ 701.7, Table 701.7 
SOLDER JOINTS ....... 212.0, 309.2, Table 313.3, 402.6, 
605.1.3.1, 605.1.4, 605.16.1, 
705.3.3, 705.10.1, 705.10.2 

SPACING 
Pipe supports ............ 313.0, Table 313.3, 1210.3.5, 
1210.3.5.1, Table 1210.3.5.1, 
1323.4, Table 1323.4.4, 
1327.6, Table 1327.6 


Subsoil irrigation fields ................... 1504.73 
Trenching and leaching beds ............... H 601.9 
SPECIAL FIXTURES .......................... 406.0 
SPECIAL VENTING ........................... 909.0 
SPECIAL WASTE PIPE .......... (see Industrial wastes) 
SPECIAL WASTES 
ასა iL epi ee harap E poner aes 811.2 
Chemical. rasia ызыл beeen алыры КЫ 811.0 
Definitlon:..«. el cece chore ердин иы ш hee dade 221.0 
Industrial! "!"!)ს!სხ"""""'"''")" 811.0 
High temperatures ............... 810.1, Table 810.1 


Laundries, slaughterhouses, 
bottling establishments, 
and auto wash racks 

SPECIFIC GRAVITY, 


NATURAL GAS ........................... 1214.1 
SPECIFICATIONS 

FOR MATERIALS .................. 301.2, Table 1701.1 
STACKS .............. 221.0, 317.1, 706.2, 711.1, 906.1, 


907.0, 911.3, 1101.16.2, C 304.3, 

C 304.4, C 401.0, C 601.0 

STAINLESS STEEL PIPE ....... Table 313.3, Table 604.1, 
605.13, Table 701.2, 705.7 


STANDPIPE, 
CLOTHES WASHER ......................... 804.1 
STATION INLETS 
AND OUTLETS ......... 221.0, 1305.3, Table 1305.3, 


1315.0, 1323.12, 
Table 1323.1.5(1) 
STEAM EXHAUST CONDENSER 


OR BLOW OFF ................... 810.0, Table 810.1 
STERILE EQUIPMENT ........................ 806.0 
STORAGE TANKS 

Alternate water sources ....... 1503.3, 1505.4, 1506.4 
Ної маїег . .................... 505.2, 608.6, 608.7, 

L 502.2, L 503.3.2, L 503.3.7 
Potable water ........................... E 502.7 
Rainwater ...................... 1602.73, 1603.0, 


K 102.2, K 103.3, K 105.0 

Vacuum drainage ...................... C 501.2.1 
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ..... Chapter 11, Appendix D 
STORM DRAINS.......... 221.0, 1101.4.4, 1101.6, 1101.11, 
1101.12, 1101.13, 1101.15, 

1103.0, 1104.1 


580 


STORM SEWERS .......... 221.0, 715.3, 1101.2, 1101.4.5, 
1101.12.2.2.2, 1101.13.1, 
1103.2, 1104.1 


STRAINERS 
AND CONNECTIONS .................. 407.5, 408.5, 
810.4, 1012.1, 1102.2 
S-TRAP PROHIBITED ........................ 1004.1 
STREET MAIN; 
(SEE WATER MAIN) .......... 225.0, 608.1, 608.3, 610.7, 
Table 721.1, Table 1503.4, A 104.2, 
A 104.4, Table H 101.8 
STRUCTURAL 
CONDITION SAFETY ................. 312.2, 312.11 
SUBMETER 
Definition exei ae Pies De epe res 221.0 
(წწ.იI I-II .”»Xსიი“/იი“”""'''"''" 601.2.1 
SUBMITTAL OF PLANS ..... 103.3, 104.3, 104.3.2, 104.3.3, 


301.5.3, 811.1, 910.2, 

1105.1, 1304.3, 1505.2.1, 

1602.2, C 301.1, C 501.1, 

E 101.2, H 501.1, K 101.3.1 

SUBSOIL DRAINS ........ 221.0, 1101.4.6, Table 1101.4.6, 
1101.6, 1101.8, 1101.9 


SUBSOIL 
IRRIGATION FIELDS ...... 221.0, 1503.2.1, Table 1503.4, 
1504.2, 1504.5, Table 1504.5.3 
SUBSTITUTE MATERIALS ..................... 301.3 
SUBSURFACE 
DISPOSAL FIELDS 
Absorption capacity ....................... 1504.3 
Construction .................... 1504.5, 1504.5.3 
Prohibited ............. lese 1504.4 
Required area ........................... 1504.2 
Sewage disposal ........................ H 101.2 
System Requirements ............ 1503.2, 1503.2.1, 
Table 1503.4 
Valves «isole REY per PE 1504.1 
SUBSURFACE 
IRRIGATION FIELDS ................ 221.0, 1503.2.1, 
1504.2 — 1504.4, 1504.5, 
1504.5.2 
SUDS RELIEF ................................. 711.0 
SUMPS 
Boiler room, installation ............... 810.1, 810.3 


Building, backwater 


devices ............... 710.1, 710.3, 710.4, 710.6 
Building drainage 

systems below sewer level ................... 710.2 
Condensers .................... 810.0, Table 810.1 
Construction ............................. 810.2 
აეე->_–__-_-__""' 221.0 
Macerating toilet systems ................. 710.13.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Pump connection permitted ..... 710.2 — 710.5, 710.9, 
805.1, 1101.6.2, 1101.7 
Pump discharges, conversion 


to fixture units ..................... 702.3, 710.5 
ააა. ”''"'!"'"'"'!"" 710.2 
Sizing, sewage 

ejector and pumps ....................... 710.3 
Storm drainage ............ 1101.6.2, 1101.6.3, 1101.7, 

1101.10, 1101.11, 1101.14 

სა  --"""""'' 710.7, 710.10, 710.13.3, 
810.1, Table 810.1 

Water supply inlets ....................... 603.5.5 

SUPPLY, WATER 

Fittings, fixtures ........................... 402.7 
Fixture, definition .......................... 208.0 
Fixture units ................... 610.3, Table 610.3, 


610.7 — 610.10, Table 610.10, 

Table A 103.1, C 303.2, 

C 501.5, E 302.1, E 302.2, 

E 302.2.2, L 402.3.1 

Hot маїег.................. 601.2.1, 602.1, 603.4.5, 
603.5.10, 608.7, 609.1, 

609.4, 610.3, Table 610.3, 

610.12.1, 610.12.2, 

Table A 103.1, A 105.3, 

Table C 303.2, L 502.5, 

L 502.7, L 502.73 

Materials ..................... 604.0, Table 604.1, 
1503.9.2 — 1503.9.4, 

1505.7, 1506.7, 

1602.7, K 103.4 

Nonpotable water............ 601.3, 603.5.11, 1506.6 
Pipe, sizeof ................... 610.0, Table 610.3, 
Table 610.4, Table A 103.1, 

Table C 303.2, Appendix M 

Potable water, protection .......... 409.5, 410.2, 412.2, 
414.2, 419.3, 602.0, 

603.0, 1303.5, 1503.3, 

1505.4, 1506.4, 1602.4, 

E 502.3, K 101.9, 

K 102.2, L 411.2 


Pressüre: i.e REA 608.0, 1603.14, A 104.3, 
E 302.2.3, E 502.5, K 105.11 
Quality .............. 601.2, 1501.7, 1505.15. 1506.8, 


1506.10.2, 1601.7, 1603.5, 
1603.16, E 302.1, K 101.7, 
K 104.3, K 104.4 


Quantity 2.02.2. col ee. 413.1 — 413.4, 416.2, 

419.3, 610.3, E 302.1 
565 че ачыр uc sce аса Dae 408.11, E 302.2 
Tanks, water ...................... 603.5.5, 608.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


Testing: uc rn Re PELA vb eee So 609.4 
Valves. = аа о Eta Pasties doses აბე. 606.0 
SUPPORTS ................. 221.0, 313.0, Table 313.3, 


402.4, 507.3, 5073.1, 

507.4, 507.19, 509.5.8, 
509.6.4, 509.7.5, 509.10.9, 
609.1, 718.2, 906.4, 1208.6.2, 
1208.14.1, 1210.3, 1210.3.5, 
Table 1210.3.5.1, 1323.4, 
1323.4.4, Table 1323.4.4, 

E 402.4, E 404.2, F 901.4, 

H 601.3, L 501.2 


SURFACE WATER, 
DISCHARGE ......................... 306.2, 714.2, 
811.1, 1101.1, 1101.11 
SURGETANKS .............................. 221.0 
SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS, 
ANDHOTTUBS ............ 603.5.5, 603.5.21, 813.0, 
L 407.1, L 503.3.6 
SYSTEMS 
Chimney venting ................ 509.5.5, 509.6.2.4 
Circuit муепїїпд............................. 911.0 
Clothes washer............ 205.0, 1503.1.1, 1503. 1.2, 
1503. 1.3, 1503.2.2 
Combination waste and vent ........... 205.0, 910.0, 
Appendix B 
COMPIOX ivl Vt ЫЙ 205.0, 1503.13 
Defective, testing Of ...................... 105.3.1 
Dialysis water ................... 603.5.18.1, 614.0 
Direct-vent ...................... 509.6.1, 509.8.1 
Durham, definition ......................... 206.0 
Engineered .............. 509.10.8.1, 912.0, C 201.1 
Exhaust ша чь e en eet шн АШЕР Yet e 507.21, 
509.3.4, 509.6.1 
Fire protection (protection from) ............ 603.5.14 
Firefighter breathing 
air replenishment ................... Appendix F 
Firestop. vii каана RU pe Chapter 14 
Fire sprinklers ............................ 612.1 
FOG disposal... о оа gana ates 1015.0 
Fuel gas piping ................ 507.18, Chapter 12, 
E 401.0 — E 406.4 
Fuel gas venting ........... 509.0, Table 509.4, 510.0 
Gray water ....................... 601.3.3, 1502.0 
Independent .............................. 311.0 
Lightning protection ....................... 1211.5 
Macerating toilet ......................... 710.13 
Mechanical draft ............... 509.3.3, 509.10.3.2, 
509.10.7 
Medical gas 
and medical vacuum ........... 319.0, Chapter 13 
Natural draft venting .................... 509.6.2.1 
On-site treated nonpotable ........... 601.3.3, 1506.0 
Plumbing vent, definition .................... 218.0 
Plumbing venting .......... 710.7, Chapter 9, C 401.0 


581 


INDEX 


Potable water 


Contamination and damage ...... C 302.1, C 302.2, 
C 501.3 
Definition: ааа Doer Renew 218.0 
ს“ყ-იიი””"”'''''"''"" 609.10 
Excessive water pressure ................. 608.2 
Manufactured/mobile home 
park water supply ............ E 302.1 – E 302.8 
Materials .................... 604.1, Table 604.1 
Peak water demand ................. Appendix M 
Sizing the water supply 
system ............... Appendix A, Appendix M 
Used piping ............................ 604.8 
MalV8s nists ყია უიი IM UE a а dares ТЕ 606.1 
Private sewage disposal ......... 713.2, 713.3, 713.5, 


714.0, 716.1, 723.1, 
904.1, Appendix H 


Pure water ргосеѕѕ ...................... 603.5.18 
Rainwater catchment ....... 220.0, 601.3.3, Chapter 16, 
Appendix K, L 501.0 

T Reclaimed (recycled) ............... 601.3.3, 1503.3, 
1505.0, 1505.4, 1602.4 

Sanitary drainage ...................... Chapter 7, 


E 301.0 – E 301.4.1, 
Е 504.1 – E 504.5 


SImple...—. rui b elem 221.0, 1503.1.2 
Single-stack vent ........................ C 601.0 
Sprinkler 4i nid EERAORREEP RO DERE 612.0 
Storm water drainage ........ Chapter 11, Appendix D 
Ultraviolet water treatment ..... Table 611.1, 1506.10.2, 
K 104.4.2, N 105.1 
Vacuum drainage ........................ C 501.0 
Ventilation ....................... 506.1.3, 506.73 
ს-ს-,'”””"''"''""'''""ს""!! 908.2.5 
“T= 

T RATING ............................ 222.0, 1404.3, 
1405.3, 1406.4 

TAILPIECES 
Connection .............. 414.3, 419.2, 910.5, 910.6 
Definition: ОЛКО КЛ Л ER pae ub 222.0 
Maximum length of .................... 910.5, 1001.2 
SIZES: MEE: 407.5, 408.5, 409.2, 420.4, 
B 101.3, B 101.5, B 101.6.1 

TANKS 

II Animals and Іпѕесіѕ ..................... 1503.9.3 
DOSING. ошку г: Genet ela ROMERO E Rode H 601.8 
Expansion .................... 608.2, 608.3, 812.1 
„სსა“ 208.0, 402.4, 413.1, 601.2 
Flushometer ...................... 610.11, A 106.3 
| Freeze protection ....................... 1503.9.4 
Gray water systems daily discharge ........ 1503.8.3 
Hot water storage .............. 608.3, 608.6, 608.7, 
L 502.2, L 503.3.2 
Маїепаз$........................... 710.8, 810.2 
ი-”წ''"'"''" 10171, E 403.12, E 403.13, E 404.6 


582 


Rainwater storage ................ 1602.73, 1603.6, 
K 102.2, K 103.3, K 105.0 
Reclaimed water storage ................... 1505.4 
Septie елык Pee as 714.3, 716.1, 722.2 — 722.4, 
Appendix H 
Sump or receiving ............ 710.2, 710.7 — 710.10, 
810.2, 1101.7 
Surge ss iR CER 221.0, 1503.2.1, Table 1503.4 
1503.9.1, 1504.10 
Urinal. [pU exe Ура ЛГ US 603.5.2 
Water closet ................. 404.2.2, 405.1, 601.2, 
603.5.2, 603.5.3, L 402.2 
Water supply ....................... 608.1, 608.6, 
608.7, E 502.7, E 506.1 
TELEPHONE AND DATA 
EQUIPMENT ROOMS ....................... 310.15 || 
TEMPERATURE AND 
PRESSURE-RELIEF VALVES ............ 504.6, 505.2 
TEMPERATURE-LIMITING DEVICES ....... 407.3, 408.4, 
409.4, 410.3, 504.5 
TEMPORARY USE OF GAS ................... 1207.0 
TERMINATION OF VENTS .............. 509.6.1, 509.8 
509.8.1, 906.0, H 501.11 
TESTING AGENCY, DEFINITION ................. 222.0 Il 
TESTS 
BI ta: Gehan et 105.3, 105.3.1, 609.4, 712.3, 723.1, 
1107.2.2, 1107.2.3, 1213.16 
Alternate materials and methods .............. 301.3 
Building sewer ...... 102.4.1, 105.2.1, 105.2.1.2, 723.0 
Cross-connection ................ 1502.3, 1502.3.2, 
1505.14.2, 1505.14.2.2 | 
Exceptions ....................... 105.3, 1107.2.3 
სალათას“ –““'”'' 712.1 
Fuel gas piping .......................... 1213.0 
Gauges ovo ique Geel’ 318.0, 1203.3.2 
Percolation ....................... 1504.3, H 401.0 
Reclaimed (recycled) water ............... 1505.16 || 
დაწ -'”“” """'”შ'""'""!!" 105.3 
ღფღ–.-#VXი„ჟ»თდრC:-ი«ილლლო.:-C·""'' 105.2.5 
Shower receptors ........................ 408.8.5 
Storm drainage .......................... 1106.0 
Testing agency.............. 222.0, 301.3.1.1, 505.4, 
610.2, 1406.4 
Маеў. бар И 609.4, 712.2, 
1107.2.1, 1107.2.3 
Water supply systems .............. 105.2.1.1, 609.4 
THREADED JOINTS ............ 605.1.5, 605.2.3, 605.5.2, 


605.11.3, 605.12.3, 605.16.1, 
705.1.8, 705.3.4, 705.4.2, 
705.6.3, 705.10.2, 1208.5.8, 
1208.5.9.1, 1322.5 
THREE SINGLE 


COMPARTMENT SINKS ..................... 1001.2 
TOILET, DEFINITION . .......................... 222.0 || 
TOILET FACILITY, DEFINITION ................... 222.0 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


TOILET ROOM, DEFINITION .................... 222.0 
TOILETS im heer RR (see Water closets) 
TOILETS, FAMILY 

OR ASSISTED - USE FACILITY .............. 422.1.2 
TRACERWIRE ................... 604.10.1, 1210.1.7.2 
TRANSITION GAS RISER .............. 222.0, 1210.4.4 
TRANSITION ჰ0IMI1§........................ 705.9.4 
TRAPS I Be ees ak dew RUE ae Oe Chapter 10 
АТ: Зд Moree иий шй улуй 222.0, Table 702.1, 707.14, 
1002.2, Table 1002.2, 1002.3 
Bar and fountain sinks ................. 801.4, 902.2 
Воі: eer erp t fot in 1008.0 
Bootle სა. he Ne CUERO 1004.1 
Condensers апа зитр$..................... 810.1 
Crown weir ................... 222.0, 409.6, 905.5, 
1001.2, 1002.2, 1002.4 
Definition ll Oe Se a ees 222.0 
В ЖЕРЛЕ ТО КТО IER MEI ТЕ 1004.1 
Floor drains ....................... 704.3, 1003.1, 
1006.0, 1007.1 
Food storage areas ................. 418.4, 801.3.2 

For three-compartment 
sinks or three lavatories .................. 1001.2 
From fixture, distance оѓ .................... 1001.2 
From vent, distance of .......... 1002.2, Table 1002.2 
Gray water system ...................... 1503.9.6 
Grease interceptors ...................... 1014.1.1 
Indirect wastes ........................... 803.3 
Integral '“““ო”""""'"""'”””"" 1001.2 
Island sinks «scc "ს"! 909.1 
Materials... iste ке Sesh 807.2, 906.6, 1003.1 
Minimum size ............ 702.1, Table 702.1, 1003.3 
Nonwater иппа\$......................... 412.1.1 
Prohibited types .......................... 1004.0 
Required ......................... 1001.0, 1101.15 
Seal «uie b EI UL 222.0, 412.1.1, 912.2, 
1005.0, 1007.1, E 501.6 
Seal primer ........................ 222.0, 1007.1 
Separate for each fixture ................... 1001.2 
Slip:joints- 2: lele de eee al 705.9.1, 1003.2 
Standpipe receptors ....................... 804.1 
Storm drains and leaders .................. 1101.15 
UNIONS: о Ls dote utei ums die weeks 315.1 
Unit loading ................... 702.0, Table 702.1, 
Table 703.2 
Vacuum drainage system .................. C 501.0 
M-ე:ათი“””!'"" Table 703.2, 810.1, 901.0, 


905.2, 905.5, 908.2.1, 
909.1, 1002.0, Table 1002.2 


TREATED GRAY WATER, DEFINITION ............. 222.0 
TRENCHING, EXCAVATION, 
AND BACKFILLING .................. 314.0, 1203.2, 


1210.1.1 — 1210.1.2.1, 1323.5.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


TROUGH URINALS, 
ს.ეზიიI-.I-.-”:!ხხხხMხ”ჩ ე),).) 405.2 
TUBING, COPPER ........... Table 604.1, 604.3, 604.4, 
605.1, 609.1, 609.3, 701.2, 
Table 701.2, 903.2, 1208.5.3.3, 
A 105.2, E 403.5 


IVMMნLIMC................................. 314.2 
TYPEB 
GAS VENTS ............... 224.0, 509.1, Table 509.4, 


509.5.5, 509.6.1, 509.6.2.1, 
509.6.2.2, 509.6.3.2, 

Table 509.7.3.4(1), 509.7.3.5, 
509.10.1.1, 509.10.1.2, 
509.10.8.2, 509.10.13, 510.1.6, 
510.1.10, 510.2.2, 510.2.15, 
510.2.19, 510.2.20, 


510.2.22, Appendix G 
TYPE BW GAS VENTS ........ 224.0, Table 509.4, 509.6.1, 
TYPE L GAS VENTS ............... 224.0, Table 509.4, 


509.6.1, 509.6.2.2, 
Table 509.7.3.4(1), 509.10.1.1, 
509.10.1.2, 509.10.12 


== 
UNDERGROUND 
Backflow prevention devices ............... 603.4.9 
Building storm drains ..................... 1101.4.4 
Drainage piping ............ 701.2, Table 701.2, 720.0 
Fuel gas piping ....... 1203.2, 1208.5.2.4, 1208.5.3.4, 
1210.1, E 401.2, E 402.2, 
E 403.7, E 403.8, E 403.8.4 
Gray water piping ....................... 1503.9.2 
Medical gas and 
medical vacuum piping ........... 1323.2, 1323.5.1 
Stop-and-waste valves ................... 603.5.17 
Storm water piping ................. 1101.4, 1101.4.2 
TANKS: ”–""'"'"” 1503.9.1, 1601.11.2, 1603.8, 
E 403.11, K 105.0 
UNIONS онла ан 315.1 
Vent таїѓега! ........................ 903.1, 903.2 
Water piping ............... 604.3, 609.9, 1506.10.4 
UNIONS 
Dielectric ............... 605.15, 605.16.1, 605.16.3 
Fuel gas piping ................... 1212.6, E 404.2 
Location. zs asa Rates chee 315.1, 609.5, 710.6 
Medical gas and 
medical vacuum piping .................. 1322.7 
ას (იას ,'ასX»””სსს""'" ER 1101.6.2 
Where allowed ............................ 315.1 
UNIT LOADING OF TRAPS ........ 702.1, Table 702.1(1) 
UNITS, FIXTURE ................... (see Fixture, units) 
UNLAWFUL CONNECTIONS ....... 404.2, 602.0, 1205.2 
UNSANITARY, DEFINITION .................... 223.0 


583 


INDEX 


UPC, DEFINITION ............................ 223.0 
URINALS .................. 402.5, 402.6, 405.2, 412.1, 
II 412.1.1, 412.12, 412.1.3, 412.1.4, 


412.1.4.1, 413.0, 418.3, 601.2, 
603.5.1, 603.5.2, 707.4, 710.3, 
910.7, 1003.1, 1014.1, 1014.3.2.1, 
1501.9, 1505.1, 1506.1, 1506.10.2, 
1506.10.5, 1602.1, 1603.14, 1603.19, 
1604.2, E 501.2, E 501.5, 

K 105.11 L 402.3 


USE OF ALTERNATE MATERIAL ................ 301.3 
USER OUTLET, DEFINITION ................... 223.0 
-V- 

VACUUM BREAKERS ............ 224.0, 412.2, 601.3.4, 


Table 603.2, 603.3.2, 
603.3.5, 603.3.6, 603.4.4, 
603.5.1, 603.5.5, 603.5.6, 

603.5.7, 603.5.9, 603.5.13, 
603.5.15, 603.5.16, 1303.5, 
C 501.3, E 505.4, E 506.1 


VACUUM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS ............... C 501.0 
VACUUM RELIEF VALVES ................. 224.0, 504.6, 

608.7, 1602.9 
VACUUM SYSTEM - 

LEVEL 1, DEFINITION ....................... 224.0 
VALIDITY OF CODE ........................... 101.5 
VALVES 

II Access door signs ...................... 1505.8.2 
Backwater .................... 204.0, 710.1, 710.3, 


710.6, 1006.1, 1503.2.3, 
1503.9.1, 1503.9.7, 
1603.9, K 105.4 


Balancing, definition ....................... 224.0 
Ball чы 2 heh Shieh bL LIS 606.1, 606.4, 710.4, 

710.6 
Bathtub filler ............................. 409.5 
Сеск: «аа ау Ыр 603.5.10, 608.3, 710.4, 


710.12.1, 710.13.2, 
1004.2, 1208.11.1, 
1309.11, 1311.5, 
1313.5, F 701.8 


Combination stop-and-waste .............. 603.5.17 
Combination temperature 

and pressure-relief ................. 505.2, 608.3 
Combination thermostatic/ 

pressure balancing ................. 205.0, 408.4 

ია" 408.10, 601.2, 606.5, 

606.6, 1303.1, 1306.2, 

C 501.3 

Diaphragm-type ................... 507.22, 1208.11 

Excess flow ........................ 207.0, 1209.0 

Flow balancing .......................... L 501.7 

584 


Flush, definition ........................... 208.0 
Flushometer .............. 208.0, 411.2.2, 411.2.2.1, |l 

413.1, 413.2, 601.2, 603.5.1, 

610.10, Table 610.10, 


L 402.2.2 

Füllway ИККО УГ ЛЛ СОТ rd eS 606.2, 710.6 
(Gale. o RI Roe 606.1, 606.4, 710.3, 710.4, 
710.6 

Gray water бїуепїег...................... 1503.2.2 
Installation... uelle wwe ee 310.7 
Isolation .................. 224.0, F 501.7, Е 601.5.1, 
F 701.3, F 801.6 

MIXING ze ხმხძხ”ზშზ"შჩო!"!”'"'""''!"!'"!!ს!ს!! 4175 
Рге-гіпѕе spray .................... 420.3, L 201.0, 
Table L 402.1, L 402.8 

Ргеѕѕиге-раіапсіпо ................... 218.0, 408.4 
Pressure-reducing ..... 1504.5.2(6), 1504.5.7, 1603.13, 


A 1072, E 403.13, 

F 701.3, K 105.11 

Pressure-relief ........... 504.4, 504.6, 505.2, 5079, 
607.6, 608.2 — 608.6, 

1208.10.4, 1306.2, 1308.2, 

1308.3, 1309.5, 1310.3, 

1310.4, 1315.15, 1316.1, 

1324.4, 1324.5, 1327.71, 

E 302.5, E 302.6, F 501.8, 


F 701.3 
ისს ა wins enr ep Cres 609.11 
RISE prep 224.0, 1314.8, 
1323.14.4 

Seals" cust edi e Pede b ee 1505.9.1 || 
Service ......... 224.0, 1314.9, 1323.14.5, E 402.4.2 
Shutoff err eb a 504.6, 606.2, 606.3, 


606.6, 608.4, 609.9, 
710.12.1, 1202.1, 

1203.3.2, 1208.11, 1208.12, 
1210.3.3.1, 1210.8.2, 

1210.9 — 1210.9.5, 1210.11, 
1210.12.5, 1212.3.1, 1212.3.2, 
1212.5.3, 1212.6, 1212.7, 
1213.2.5, 1213.6.1.4, 1310.3.2, 
1312.2, 1314.6, 1823.14, 
13272, 1503.9.1, E 302.3, 

E 402.3, E 402.4.2, E 403.0, 
E 408.9, E 403.13, E 404.5, 

E 505.4, E 506.1, F 601.1, 

K 105.4, L 402.3.1, L 404.6, 

L 410.3, L 413.4 


აა, ES 1505.9.2 || 

სა d vc S DELIS REIS 224.0, 1314.6, 1314.7, 
1323.14.2, 1324.5.4.2 

Temperature relief .............. 504.5, 504.6, 505.2 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


Thermostatic ....................... 222.0, 408.4 
Vacuum interface ....................... C 501.2.4 
Vacuum relief ............ 224.0, 504.6, 607.5, 608.7, 

1505.11, 1506.10.3, 1602.9 


ZONE: жогы ш Ohare Кы eee we Fs 224.0, 1314.4 
VENT, PLUMBING ........................ Chapter 9 
Below trap weir ..................... 905.5, 1002.4 
Branch, definition ......................... 204.0 
Buildings over 10 stories .................... 907.1 


Changes in direction of ..................... 903.3 


Chemical ...................... 811.2, 811.5, 811.6 
Combination waste and 

vent system design ................. 205.0, 910.0, 

Appendix B 

Connections ............. 310.2, 805.0, Table 810.1, 


905.1, 905.2, 908.1.2, 
908.2.1, 911.2, 1503.2.2 


Continuous, definition ...................... 205.0 
2-23<-_-44ი..ჟ" 224.0 
Distance of trap from ........... 1002.2, Table 1002.2 
Double fitting for ..................... 704.2, 905.6 
Engineered: eurer bee E pex xA 912.0 
Expansion joints ........... 705.9.2, 1101.5, 1213.2.2 
ყი. --_”''' ERE 701.2, Table 701.2, 903.1 
Fixtures, back-to-back ................ 704.2, 905.6 
Flagpoling, prohibited ...................... 906.3 
Flashing for ................... 312.8, 701.5, 906.1, 
906.5, 906.6 
Frost or snow closure ...................... 906.7 
Grade: Of iios Ita 905.1, 905.3, 911.4 
Height above fixture ....................... 905.3 
Height above grade ........................ 906.4 
Horizontal................ Table 703.2, 904.2, 905.3 
Indirect waste ................. 803.3, 805.1, 902.1 
Individual, definition ........................ 211.0 
Interceptors ................ 902.1, 1009.4, 1014.1.1, 
1014.2.2, 1016.4, 1017.1 
Island sinks and fixtures .................... 909.0 
Length of ........... Table 702.1, Table 703.2, 904.0 
Маїепа!1ог..................... 701.0, Table 701.2, 
811.2, 903.0, 1503.9.2 
Method of installation ...... 310.5, 903.3, 906.2, 906.4 
Not гедией.............................. 902.0 
Not to be used as 
soil or waste pipe ........................ 310.4 
Opening location ................... 905.5, 1002.4 
>>>9ი-20ძ0ძ0ძო)ძ""" 907.1 
Piping, support of ..................... Table 313.3 
Prohibited ................... 310.4, 903.1, 903.2.2 
Relief: ce te oe ЛГ ЛЛ ГГ 220.0, 805.0, 
907.0, 911.3, 1009.4 
Required) ' '”'””“''ო" MM" ” я 901.2, 904.1 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


INDEX 


Required separately 
on every trap ................ 901.2, 1002.1, 1002.2 
Sizing.............. Table 702.1, 703.0, Table 703.2, 
904.0, 908.1.1, 908.1.2, 
908.2.2, 910.4, C 401.0, 
Table C 401.1, C 601.2 


ჯ----“”“”””ს"'"”შ"' 909.0 
Баск rS 224.0, 906.1, 
907.0, C 401.2, C 601.2 
SUMP 2 a al 710.7, 710.10, 710.13.3, 
810.1, Table 810.1 
System, definition ......................... 224.0 
Termination .................. 905.4, 906.0, 906.2.1 
Testing. элее ds eet ord v d 712.0, 1504.10 
Trap seal protection .................. 901.3, 1002.0 
Undiminished in 
size through roof ................... 905.4, 907.1 
Unitloading ......................... Table 703.2 
Wet, Horizontal ........................... 908.2 
Wet, Vertical... sou Re Deka PR 908.1 
ი თას" 227.0, 907.0 
VENTED APPLIANCE, DEFINITION .............. 224.0 
Category I Vented Appliance, definition ......... 224.0 
Category II Vented Appliance, definition ........ 224.0 
Category III Vented Appliance, definition ........ 224.0 
Category IV Vented Appliance, definition ....... 224.0 
VENTILATING HOODS ................ 509.2.4, 509.3.4 
VERTICAL-TO-HORIZONTAL 
DRAINAGE FITTINGS ....................... 706.4 
VERTICAL WET VENTING ............. (see Wet vents) 
VIOLATION, NOTICES OF ...................... 106.2 
VITRIFIED CLAY PIPE ......... 701.2, Table 701.2, 705.8, 


811.2, Table 1101.4.6 


-W- 
WALL, EXTENSION THROUGH 
WALL-HUNG FIXTURES, 


INSTALLATION OF ..................... 402.4, 402.6 
WASH FOUNTAINS . .................... 41711,41712 
WASH RACKS, АОТО......................... 1011.0 
WASTES 

Anesthetic gas disposal .................... 1301.2 
Chemical .................... 205.0, 811.0, 903.2.2 
Clear water ......................... 205.0, 812.0 
Condensate ......................... 807.2, 814.0 
Continuous м. ука КК. кыр н КК 205.0, 407.5, 

408.5, 409.2, 419.2 


Cooling water 
Definition ‚а а Ах dct art 225.0 
Detrimental or harmful .......... 305.1, 306.1, 714.1, 

811.1, 1009.1, H 901.1 
Flammable ....................... 1009.1, H 901.1 
Indirect. «ossia си аи Chapter 8, 1303.4.1 


585 


INDEX 


Industrial ..................... 211.0, 306.0, 801.1, 
811.1, 903.2.2 
სა“ 12er RE 214.0, 303.0, 304.0, 710.2, 


811.1, 1006.1, 1009.1, H 101.3, 
H 701.1, H 901.1, L 302.0 


Materials, pipe ....................... 701.1, 811.2 
Pipe, деїїпїїп............................ 225.0 
Pretreatment required................. 811.1, 1014.1 
PIOCESS itas anis same Soca iets 1013.1 
Special, йдейпїїоп.......................... 221.0 
Swimming pools .......................... 813.1 
WATER 
Backflow prevention ............. Table 603.2, 603.3 
Cross contamination ................. 601.2, 602.2, 
603.1 — 603.3.10 
Distribution piping material ........ 604.1, Table 604.1 
Distribution system design ................... 601.1 
Excessive pressure ........................ 608.2 
ყეეყეელ"-"“““”შხტხჩრთ”""''"")ს 609.11 
Heating system requirements for 
California Energy Code ................... 501.2 
Identification .............................. 601.3 
Lead content ...................... 604.2, 604.2.1 
Minimum quality requirements for 
reclaimed (recycled) water ............... 1505.15 
Nonpotable ..................... 603.5.11, 1506.7, 
1506.10.5, L 408.1 
Rainwater, material ........................ 1101.4 
Reclaimed 2...2. fia за: 1602.4 
Storm water ................. (see Storm drainage) 
ძი  '" 601.2.1, 601.2.1.1, 601.2.1.2 
Supply demand ........... A 103.1, C 303.2, M 102.5 
Supply piping material............ 604.1, Table 604.1 
Treatment ипї$............................ 611.0 
WATER CLOSETS ...................... 411.0, 4112.4 
Approved standards ........................ 411.1 
Clearance vogue PE a ew ex 402.5 
Compartments ................ E 501.3.2, E 501.3.3 
Delfinitioh-. «nd eR а ОКЫ 225.0 
Effective flush volume ...................... 411.2 
Flanged fixture Connection .................. 402.6 
Floor-mounted, back-outlet................. 402.6.3 
Flushometer Valve Activated ........ 411.2.2, 411.2.2.1 
Manufactured/Mobile home ......... E 501.2, E 501.3, 
Performance ............................ 411.2.3 
E 501.3.1, E 501.6 
Prohibited .......................... 405.1, 910.7 
бвал ты ае he ee tah tote ბა ს EN 411.3 
Water consumption ................. 411.2, L 402.2 
WATER-CONSERVING 
FIXTURES AND FITTINGS ............. 401.3, L 402.0 
WATER CONSUMPTION 
LavatorieS: ore "'''"""""”' 4072 
Showerhead & body sprays ............ 408.2, 408.3 
Water closets ............................. 411.2 


586 


WATER HAMMER ARRESTORS .......... 225.0, 609.11 
WATER HEATERS ........................ Chapter 5 
202066655 PRO EE ME cao 504.3.1, 507.13.2, 
507.25, 508.4 

Approval requirements ...................... 501.1 
Approved standards ...... Table 501.1(1), 505.3, 505.4 
Clearances: viver uus 504.3 — 504.3.2, 
508.1, 508.2.1 

Combustion air required .................... 506.0 
Connectors sca etur aw ERA AME eue d 604.13 
Dual purpose, definition .................... 225.0 
სე... к=з шнын Шандык ШЕЕ: 225.0 
Garages ss кк дын EAE Lt RUE 507.13 
Inspections ათ ””'""''"'""'””'””” 503.2 
სI- -Iა:–"''''"'' უ'უ''”'!' 507.0 
ს.ა" ERR 504.1, 507.12 – 507.15 
Oil-burning and other ...................... 505.0 
Permits required .......................... 502.0 
Pressure-relief valves ........... 504.4, 504.6, 505.2, 
608.2 — 608.5 

Protection ................... 504.3 — 504.6, 505.2, 


507.2, 507.8, 507.10, 
507.14.1, 507.24 


Relief valve discharge ...................... 608.5 
Seismic provisions ......................... 5072 
Temperature and 
pressure-relief valves ............... 504.6, 505.2 
Temperature-limiting devices ................. 504.5 
Vents; uto гра NUES Roh andes 509.0, 510.0 
Water heating system requirements ............ 501.2 || 
WATER SOFTENERS................ 611.4, Table 611.4 
WATER STATION ............................. 225.0 
WATER TESTS 
Building Sewers ........................... 723.0 
Drainage and vent systems ............. 105.3, 712.2 
Storm drainage .................. 11072.1, 11072.3 
Water supply systems ........ 105.2.1.1, 105.3, 609.4 
WATERPROOFING 
AND WATERTIGHT 
Building sewer ............................ 723.1 
Gleanouts «cl ааа аа ss 707.3 
ია)... ა-·-––ს'''"'""სს" ees. 105.3 
Drain pans: ”.”'''"'''"'"ს!MMსსს' 507.5 
ა. '”ჟ 402.2, 408.6, 408.8, 418.2 
Flashings .................... 312.8, 906.5, 1102.3 
Interceptors ............................. 1016.3 
Joints ............. 105.3, 1504.7.3, LI 601.4, LI 601.6, 
LI 601.7, LI 601.10, LI 801.4 
Openings ................... 312.8, 312.10.2, 317.1 
Sump or receiving tanks ............... 710.2, 710.8 
Лапко А nd 714.5, 1503.9.1, 


1504.10, Н 501.3, 
Н 1001.2, К 105.2 
Vacuum drainage systems ................. C 501.8 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


WATER/WASTEWATER 

UTILITY, DEFINITION .......................... 225.0 
WEEP HOLES, SUBDRAIN 

OF SHOWER STALLS ......................... 408.7 


WEIGHT OF FLASHING, LEAD 
WEIGHTS AND QUALITY 

OF MATERIALS ................. 301.2, 401.2, 604.1, 

701.2, 906.6, 1102.3.1 

-” 212.0, 605.13.2, 705.72, 

1208.5.9.1, 1208.5.9.3, 

1322.1, F 1101.2 


WELDED JOINTS 


WELDER, PIPE, DEFINITION 
WELL, DISTANCE FROM 

SEWAGE DISPOSAL .............. 721.1, Table 721.1, 

H 101.8, Table H 101.8 


“ია.” ს," 908.0 
ს-ს ა .“”“”""შ"""'''"'"'" 225.0 
ა-ი.ი–0'' 908.2.3, 908.2.4 
Horizontal ................... 908.2, B 101.2, C 601.6 
Vent connection ............................ 908.2 
Мейса“ ”''“' Д оаа 908.1 

WHIRLPOOL BATHTUBS ................ 225.0, 409.0 

WINDOW, TERMINATION 

OF VENTS FROM ........................... 906.2 

WOODEN SINKS AND TILE 

WASH SINKS .............................. 405.3 
WORK, CONCEALED .......... 105.0 — 105.2.1.2, 309.2, 
402.10, 503.0 — 503.2, 

509.7.3.2, 1004.1, 

1203.2, 1203.3, 

1210.4, 1212.3.1, 

1212.5.3, 1213.2.1, 

1303.2, 1323.6, 1406.1 

WORK, EXISTING.................. 102.2, 102.4, 2070 
WORKMANSHIP ................ 309.0, 609.1, 1208.5.7 


WRAPPING OF PIPE 
1210.3, E 403.6 

WROUGHT IRON 
(GALVANIZED) .......... 402.6.1, Table 604.1, 604.6, 
604.7, 701.2, 707.1, 1101.4, 
1208.5.2.2, 1208.5.9.5, 
E 403.5 
БИ 414.3, 419.2, 
706.2 – 706.4, 
707.5, 707.6, 
710.4, 719.4, 9072, 
909.1, 1101.16.2 


WYE CONNECTIONS 


X-RAY DARKROOMS 


YOKE VENTS 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


z- 


ZINC ALLOY COMPONENTS 


INDEX 


406.4, 1208.5.9.5 


587 


588 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


HISTORY NOTE APPENDIX 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 
CALIFORNIA CODE OF REGULATIONS, TITLE 24, PART 5 


HISTORY: 

For prior code history, see the History Note Appendix to the 
California Plumbing Code, 2022 Triennial Edition, effective 
January 1, 2023. 


1. (BSC 02/24, DSA-SS 02/24, DSA-SS 01/24 CWoRE, 
DWR 01/24, HCD 03/24, OSHPD 02/24, SFM 02/24) 
Adoption by reference the 2024 Uniform Plumbing Code 
with necessary amendments to become the 2025 Cali- 
fornia Plumbing Code, and repeal of the 2021 edition of 
the Uniform Plumbing Code. Effective on January 1, 
2026. 


2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


589 


590 2025 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE 


LICENSE AGREEMENT 
INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF PLUMBING AND MECHANICAL OFFICIALS (IAPMO) 
CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE E-BOOK - 2025 EDITION 


The International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (“IAPMO”) agrees to grant, and the user of 
the eBook agrees to accept, a nonexclusive license to use the eBook under the terms and conditions of this eBook 
License Agreement (“Agreement”). Your use of the eBook constitutes your agreement to the terms and conditions 
set forth in this Agreement. This Agreement, or any part thereof, cannot be changed, waived, or discharged other 
than by a statement in writing signed by you and IAPMO. Please read the entire Agreement carefully. 


eBook Usage 
The IAPMO eBook may be used by one user on one computer. The user of the eBook shall be subject to all of the 
terms of this Agreement, whether or not the user was the purchaser. 


Copyright, Use and Resale Prohibitions 

IAPMO retains all rights not expressly granted to you in this Agreement. The software, content, and related 
documentation in the eBook are protected by copyright laws and international copyright treaties, as well as other 
intellectual property laws and treaties. Nothing in this Agreement constitutes a waiver of IAPMO’s rights. IAPMO 
will not be responsible for performance problems due to circumstances beyond its reasonable control. Other than as 
stated in this Agreement, you may not copy, print, modify, remove, delete, augment, add to, publish, transmit, sell, 
resell, license, create derivative works from, or in any way exploit any of the eBook's content, in whole or in part, 
in print or electronic form, and you may not aid or permit others to do so. The unauthorized use or distribution of 
copyrighted or other proprietary content is illegal and could subject the purchaser to substantial damages. Purchaser 
will be liable for any damage resulting from any violation of this Agreement. 


No Transfer 
This license is not transferable by the eBook purchaser unless such transfer is approved in advance by IAPMO, in 
which case the transferee will be subject to the terms and conditions of this Agreement. 


Disclaimer 

The eBook, or any support given by IAPMO’s technical support staff, are in no way substitutes for assistance from 
legal, tax, accounting, or other qualified professionals. If legal advice or other expert assistance 1s required, the 
services of a competent professional person should be sought. 


Limitation of Liability 

The eBook is provided “as is” and IAPMO does not make any warranty or representation, either express or 
implied, to the eBook, including its quality, accuracy, performance, merchantability, or fitness for a particular 
purpose. You assume the entire risk as to the results and performance of the eBook. IAPMO does not warrant, 
guarantee, or make any representations regarding the use of, or the results obtained with, the eBook in terms of 
accuracy, correctness or reliability. In no event will IAPMO be liable for indirect, special, incidental, or 
consequential damages arising out of delays, errors, omissions, inaccuracies, or the use or inability to use the 
eBook, or for interruption of the eBook, from whatever cause. This will apply even if IAPMO has been advised 
that the possibility of such damage exists. Specifically, IAPMO is not responsible for any costs, including those 
incurred as a result of lost profits or revenue, loss of data, the cost of recovering such programs or data, the cost of 
any substitute program, claims by third parties, or similar costs. 


Hold Harmless / Indemnification. 

You agree to defend, indemnify and hold IAPMO and any third party provider harmless from and against all third 
party claims and damages (including reasonable attorneys’ fees) regarding your use of the eBook, unless the claims 
or damages are due to IAPMO's or any third party provider's gross negligence or willful misconduct or arise out of 
an allegation for which IAPMO is obligated to indemnify you. 


Termination 
If you materially breach this License Agreement, we may terminate your right to use the Material immediately upon 
notice to you. 


You agree that, upon termination of the License Agreement, you will either return to us or destroy all copies of the 
Material in your possession. 


Additional Terms 
This written License Agreement is the exclusive agreement between you and us concerning the eBook and 


supersedes any and all prior oral or written agreements, negotiations, or other dealings between us concerning the 
eBook. 


This License Agreement may be modified only by a writing signed by the user and IAPMO. 
In the event of litigation between the user and IAPMO concerning the eBook, the prevailing party in the litigation 
and the prevailing party in any ancillary disputes (e.g., discovery disputes) will be entitled to recover attorneys' fees 


and expenses from the other party. 


This License Agreement is governed by the laws of the State of California applicable to contracts executed and 
performed entirely in, and by residents of, that state. 


This License Agreement is effective immediately upon your installation or use of the eBook. 


If you have any questions regarding this License Agreement, please write to the International Association of 
Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO), 4755 East Philadelphia Street, Ontario, California 91761-2816. 


This agreement is governed by the laws of the State of California applicable to contracts executed and performed 
entirely in, and by residents of, that state. 


